AMBUSH A Terran Empire vignette by Ann Wilson Copyright ( C ) 1992 by Ann Wilson Palace Complex , 2578 CE It would n't be easy ferreting out the identity of the field agent who 'd saved his bio-father 's life twelve years ago . It was n't supposed to be easy — ideally , it would be impossible — and Nevan was sure he owed his own life , perhaps several times over , to the Imperial safeguards he was trying to break . More , he understood why those safeguards would n't be relaxed even to allow an ex-agent to search out a still-active one — but he had what he considered two excellent reasons to do exactly that . The first was that his bio-father had died , and had wanted Nevan to give the anonymous agent his personal weapons : two forearm throwing knives , a belt knife , and a needler . The one he had sworn fealty to had agreed that his father 's wish made it a matter of honor that he try , and had given him permission — but on condition that he use only his own training and skills , taking no advantage of the fact that he was sworn to one of the most powerful people in the Empire . Nevan was certain in his own mind that if he failed , she would see that the agent got the weapons intended for him , but his thakur 's overt reason for agreeing was that it would make a good test of IntelDiv 's security . If he were arrested , she would have him released and commend the people who had done it ; if he got through , she would have security procedures tightened . Neither paid serious attention to the fact that if he were caught under certain circumstances she would have no chance to protect him ; he would be shot on sight . Nevan thought that perfectly reasonable . He was a Sandeman warrior , after all , and his thakur was an Irschchan ; risks were a normal part of life for both of them , to be accepted and even savored for the spice they added . He had done all he could here , in the Records Section ; he lowered his mind-shield and reached out . * Thakur ? * Her answer was prompt , and he smiled to himself , enjoying the cool clarity of her mind-touch . * What results , thakur-na ? * she asked . * About what we expected . Kelly told me the agent was Logistics Officer at a base on Piper 's World during the Traiti counter-attacks there , but he never told me which base , and the description he gave fits five of them . I was able to eliminate two of those because the Logistics Officers were female — but that still leaves three . I 'm going to have to go under cover to find the right one . * He “ heard ” the amused purr that was the Irschchan version of a laugh . * A return to the field work you enjoy so must be a terrible sacrifice , my Nevan . * Nevan let his thoughts lapse into High War Speech , chuckling . * Nay , Thakur , as thou knowest well — save that it does mean I must conceal thy mark , lest it identify me and make thy object in this attempt no true test . * * Aye , but it should not be for long . * * And I knew when I swore that I might have to do it ,* Nevan agreed . * Until my success or failure , then . * Three days later he was far from Terra , the violet-flower tattoo on his cheek concealed by synthiskin , in a small Kanchatka-class courier ship . That was a definite luxury for a private individual , though not unreasonable for a Sandeman warrior who 'd done well securing private employment and wanted more — who was , in short , a very good , very expensive hired killer . There were n't many , granted ; killing for its own sake was n't highly regarded on Sandeman , especially if anything more honorable was available , but there were enough to make his cover plausible . This , he had decided , was going to be fun . A couple of days later , he was less sure . He 'd come away from the Palace Complex with as much solid data as he 'd ever had starting a mission , and with as much enthusiasm , but he 'd begun feeling less than comfortable about this one . Part of it was because he was pursuing someone he would probably like to have as a friend ; the unknown agent did n't deserve to be hunted , though Nevan had to reluctantly concede that it was probably the best way to accomplish his thakur 's mission . The other part was that he could n't seem to decide whether or not he really wanted to catch his target . He wanted to make sure the weapons were delivered , yes , and since his chosen lady wanted a good test of IntelDiv 's security , he had to want it too — but he was n't happy about what those desires implied : It was almost inevitable that he 'd have to use some of a field agent 's less savory skills . He 'd used them before , often enough , and without qualms — against the Empire 's enemies . He had never used them against people who had done nothing to deserve such treatment , and he did n't really want to . He did n't have any choice , though . He would do whatever proved to be necessary to accomplish his objectives . Three weeks , five planetfalls , and almost 1500 light-years of routine checking later , Nevan discovered his quarry 's name : Kiyoshi Owajima . So far he 'd had to resort to nothing more drastic than reading and casual conversation , but learning he was after Owajima left him both disgusted at the gods ’ whimsical ordering of things and positive that things would be getting unpleasant rather shortly . He 'd never met Owajima , though he 'd wanted to , and when Nevan had left IntelDiv on swearing fealty to Ranger Losinj , Owajima had taken over the top field agent rating . Owajima was no Sandeman , but IntelDiv rumor had him close ; he was supposed to have been a Kai-school ninja before joining the Corps , and his exploits since had n't done anything to contradict the rumor . Nevan scowled at that ; he hated having to depend on rumor . Doing that tended to get agents killed — but unless you worked in the classified section of Personnel Records or knew the agent personally , rumor was all you 'd have on one . And in Owajima 's case , as in Nevan 's own , there was n't even much rumor . Kiyoshi Owajima concealed a scowl when he finished decoding his informant 's message and read it . He had a pursuer , it seemed — a Sandeman warrior named Vance DarLowrie , and the informant was convinced DarLowrie was one of the rare , expensive , and fearsome Sandeman free-lance assassins . That conviction was strengthened by the fact that DarLowrie had his own ship , the Last Resort , and it was registered to him personally rather than to Clan Lowrie . The Sandeman would neither confirm nor deny that occupation , of course , but the simple fact that he was attempting to trace an IntelDiv field agent lent still further credence to the informant 's conclusion . Owajima would have liked more information , but it seemed prudent to act on the informant 's suspicions . The Sandeman had filed a flight plan for Olathe , where Owajima had spent some time and built up a respectable net ; that seemed most promising . It was unfortunate , Owajima thought , that he was unable to investigate DarLowrie himself ; that would have to wait until he was finished with the final touches on his present case , a matter of a day or two . Still , he could begin making preparations . He would be entitled to a leave after this mission , and he had planned to take it at home on Nippon-Ni ; that was now an even better idea . His contacts on his home world made his networks elsewhere , good as they were , seem like children 's clubs — and it should not be difficult at all to permit DarLowrie to “ discover ” those intentions . It would undoubtedly be unpleasant for the one he discovered them from , since it was unlikely DarLowrie would believe information he obtained too easily . That , however , was not a serious problem ; a number of his Olathe network owed him enough that he could call on them even for such a service . It would take DarLowrie perhaps a week to reach Olathe , another week and a half to get to Nippon-Ni ; that would give Owajima time to make adequate preparations , then visit with his family for several days . He smiled to himself , transmitted the necessary messages , and returned his attention to his immediate mission . Nevan entered the Lucky Bull , a medium-priced bar near the Olathe City spaceport , and ordered a glass of chocolate milk before finding a table near the rear of the main room . In the early days after Annexation , he 'd heard , bars had carried alcoholic beverages almost exclusively , and Sandemans were made fun of for drinking only the non-alcoholic variety , but by the time he 'd started frequenting bars as an excellent source of information , the sweet high-energy beverages Sandemans preferred were as normal as alcohol . If he had Owajima figured correctly , someone at one of his last two or three stops should have been in his target 's network , and contacted him . Even if , as Nevan thought probable , Owajima was working on the Bracei case , he 'd make time to have a presumed assassin investigated . That was why Nevan had made no secret of his last destinations , following his flight plans precisely as he 'd filed them . That , and the fact that a Sandeman hired killer should n't display the subtleties and precautions that would mark him as having had Imperial training of any sort , particularly a field agent 's training ; the two simply did n't go together . A tall man in Marine service dress with captain 's bars approached Nevan 's table , carrying a drink . “ Mind if I join you , warrior ? ” he asked . “ If you wish , Captain. ” The other sat , looking him over ; Nevan returned the scrutiny , waiting . “ I 'm Kim Johansen , of SecuDiv , ” the Marine said at last . “ You 're Vance DarLowrie , just in on the Last Resort ? ” Nevan nodded . “ I am , Captain Johansen . What of it ? ” “ If you 're what rumor calls you and your ship 's name implies , I 'd advise you to lay low . The Baron here takes a dim view of assassins. ” “ Most people do , except those who have need of one . I thank you for your concern , though ; I will be careful. ” “ Good. ” Johansen sipped at his drink , frowned . “ A warrior of your clan saved my life during the war . I feel a certain obligation to repay that debt , even if I do n't particularly approve of your occupation myself. ” “ There 's no proof I 'm what you guess. ” “ The fact you do n't deny it will be enough for most. ” Johansen showed brief distaste , swallowed the rest of his drink , and rose . “ I can n't wish you luck , since that 'd mean wishing someone else dead . But I can wish it for your clan , and I do. ” Nevan rose to bow . “ I will pass your wishes , and word of your repayment , to the Lowrie . Go in peace , Captain Johansen — and please accept my wishes for your well-being . Whatever you think of me or my profession — ” most Imperials were as dubious of field agents as they were of assassins —" I want only the best for the Empire and its officers. ” “ Sandemans do n't lie , so I accept that , ” Johansen said . Then , grudgingly , “ Thank you , warrior. ” With that he left , abruptly . Nevan allowed himself a small smile , then went to get more chocolate milk . Not too promising so far , but he had n't been here long , either . Perhaps half an hour after he returned to his table , another man approached , this one in an expensive suit . “ Vance DarLowrie ? ” “ Yes. ” Nevan recognized the type ; a businesser who 'd made enemies and wanted either protection or one of them eliminated . “ I am not available at the moment. ” “ You have other employment ? ” “ That 's none of your concern. ” The businesser sat . “ It is if your target is Kiyoshi Owajima , as I 've heard . I have reason to want him . . . out of the picture. ” “ Oh ? ” Nevan remained noncommittal , but allowed himself to show a trace of interest . “ I understand he 's an Imperial officer — a dangerous target . Killing him would earn the death penalty or life imprisonment — death , if done simply for pay . That 's a foolish risk , when there are any number of almost riskless targets around. ” “ I can tell you where he 's going when he finishes his current mission. ” “ Interesting , if true , ” Nevan acknowledged . “ It 's true , ” the businesser said . Reading his face and body language , Nevan agreed . The man knew , was eager to say — and would report to Owajima as soon as he could . Nevan made himself look skeptical , which was n't hard ; this was obviously a setup . “ Even if he were my target , which I do not say , I would want more than your unsupported word . Will you submit to truth drugs , or shall I use Sandeman methods ? ” “ Torture , you mean. ” The businesser grimaced . “ In my position , I do n't dare submit to truth drugs . And I 've no desire to use my pain to convince you I 'm telling the truth. ” Nevan shrugged . “ Those are the alternatives. ” He did n't particularly like torture himself , and especially disliked using it on one of a field agent 's network . But an enemy would have no hesitation , and until he caught up with Owajima — or was caught himself — he was acting in that capacity . “ If you are convinced Owajima is my target , and you wish to assist me in finding him , you will choose one . Otherwise , you will depart. ” The businesser looked angry , but Nevan could see he 'd expected something of the sort . “ The torture , then . When and where ? ” “ My ship , now. ” Nevan stood . “ Come along. ” Nevan scowled down at the unconscious businesser . He 'd restricted his open questioning to Owajima 's plans and next location — his homeworld , not surprisingly — but he 'd done some questioning covertly as well , making comments about Owajima and reading the answers from his subject 's face and body language . The man had confirmed an opinion Nevan had formed early : given the opportunity , he and Owajima could easily become friends . This man , for instance . He 'd owed Owajima a debt , true , but it had been loyalty rather than obligation that had led him to help the way he had . Assuming he was successful in this mission , Nevan thought , he 'd have to see the businesser got some sort of compensation . Though the man had definitely been in serious pain , Nevan had inflicted no real damage beyond bruises ; when the man woke , he 'd be able to function normally . Nevan was tempted to clean the man up , put him to bed , and dose him with rapid-heal — but that was n't how one with his cover occupation would act . Instead , he got an injector of energine and triggered it into the businesser 's carotid artery . Seconds later , the man 's eyes opened and he groaned . “ Are you done yet ? ” “ Yes . You may get dressed and leave . I would advise you to waste no time ; liftoff is in ten minutes. ” “ I 'll be gone. ” The man struggled to his feet and into the small ‘ fresher , where Nevan had had him leave his clothing ; less than two minutes later he was leaving the ship . Nevan had his flight plan ready by then . He transmitted it to the spaceport controller , got clearance , and was lifting off at the specified time . Not long afterward , he was far enough from the planet to make the transition to hyperspace , and did so . Owajima smiled as he read his agent 's decoded message . DarLowrie had acted precisely as could be expected from a Sandeman assassin , it seemed , though Owajima was pleased his agent reported nothing more serious than bruises . He frowned , though , when he reached the last paragraph . “ Personal impressions : I can n't pinpoint it , but something about him reminds me of you . The feeling you give me of being looked into more than at , maybe . It 's not the typical Sandeman arrogance that makes you feel like you 're not worth the bother of looking at — it 's more like being under a microscope . I 'm sorry to be so vague , but as I said , there was n't anything definite I can point to. ” A feeling of being looked into rather than at . Owajima frowned more deeply . That bore an uncomfortable resemblance to a particularly observant person 's reaction to someone who was reading @' s face and body language . That was not a common skill , particularly among Sandemans — though he had to admit it would be as useful a skill for an assassin as it was for a field agent . In which case , it was possible DarLowrie had obtained more information than Owajima had intended — including that the information had been set up for him to find . And where had DarLowrie learned such a skill ? Not on any of the Sandeman worlds , which were n't given to such subtleties . The only places Owajima knew , in fact , that taught more than the most basic such reading were the Kai school here , and the Imperial field agent school on Terra . No Sandeman had ever studied here , and he was aware of only one who had successfully completed field agent training — his predecessor as top agent , Nevan DarLeras , now sworn to the Crown Princess by the totally-binding Sandeman personal-fealty oath . That left a graduate of one of those two schools as DarLowrie 's teacher . An ex-field agent was by far the more likely , if only because there were many more of them , and few Kai-school ninjas left Nippon-Ni . Take that as a working hypothesis , then . In that case , was it likely the agent had taught DarLowrie only face and body reading ? It would be safest , Owajima thought , to operate on the worst-case assumption that DarLowrie had learned most , if not all , of an agent 's skills . He would need them , if he had any intention of assassinating Owajima on his home territory and then escaping . Should he simply eliminate DarLowrie , or would it be better to capture and question him ? The second , Owajima decided almost immediately . That would be more difficult , but it might be a good idea to discover the agent reckless enough to teach such skills to anyone able to pay — and discourage . . . He was going to do it himself . He could and would ask for help from his former colleagues , the Shogun 's secret police — but attempted murder of an Imperial officer was an Imperial crime ; they did n't have jurisdiction . He could call in assistance , but that was something field agents were , as an occupational characteristic , disinclined to do unless there was no other way to get the job done — which , at this point , was not the case . Nevan spent the first two days of his flight to Nippon-Ni studying everything the Last Resort 's ship-comp had available about that planet . It sounded interesting , and he decided he 'd like to visit sometime when he could do so openly ; it had been settled by Japanese who wanted to return to the days of the Samurai , without giving up modern conveniences or an industrial base . They even called their Baron the “ Shogun ", on-planet . But it also looked like a dangerous place to operate . The Shogun 's secret police force was made up of the Kai-school ninjas Owajima was rumored to have been , and it seemed possible he 'd been one of them before joining the Corps . If so , he 'd undoubtedly use them for backup — which meant going in , Nevan thought , would be like sticking his head in a balik 's den . A female balik 's , with newborn cubs . One alerted field agent would be bad enough ; a police force of agent-equivalents . . . the smart thing would be to call it off , go back to Terra , set up a new identity , and start over . He did know who his quarry was , now ; he would n't be starting from scratch . He was reluctant to do that , though . He 'd done nothing even the most fanatical secret police could legally arrest him for ; it seemed a shame to abandon his mission when he was so close to accomplishing it . Being arrested without cause would be justification for mind-calling his thakur , and he was sure she 'd intervene ; Owajima had to be the only agent with an entire planetary police force to call on for backup , which made him an unrepresentative opponent . Besides , Nevan admitted , he relished the challenge . He had n't had the opportunity to really use his abilities in longer than he cared to think about . Owajima answered his phone , to see the chief of spaceport security . “ Yes , Captain ? ” “ The Last Resort just called for landing , Colonel . Do you want us to detain DarLewies ? ” “ No , thank you . Permit him to land and do as he wishes , but keep him under close surveillance . Discreetly , of course. ” The security chief smiled . “ Of course , Colonel . We will keep you informed at all times . Will you need any further assistance ? ” “ I do not believe so , but if I should , I will ask. ” Nevan had to land at the New Tokyo civilian spaceport , but he was likeliest to be able to get current information about Owajima at the nearby Imperial Navy base , so he rented a car and drove the twenty kilometers north . He 'd been on so many worlds that he did n't find Nippon-Ni particularly remarkable , though he was pleased that the temperature was high enough he did n't need a jacket . And the smell of chocolate chip cookies or a close local equivalent coming from a shop he passed was tempting enough to make his mouth water , but he kept going ; Nevan DarLeras ’ fondness for those was well enough known in the wrong circles that he did n't dare indulge it when he was under cover . Things were definitely not going his way , he decided as he neared the base . Traffic was too heavy for a normal workday , and he found out why when he got close to the main gate : a banner over the road welcomed visitors to the annual Base Open House . Nevan addressed a caustic , “ Why me ? ” to the gods he only half-believed in , but it might look suspicious if he turned and left ; instead , he kept going with traffic , which took him to a parking area that would need major help to look like a lawn again after being used this way . There was n't anything useful he could accomplish during an open house , with all the base offices closed , so he decided he might as well bow to the inevitable and try to enjoy himself . Such events did have their good points ; the various units ’ hospitality stands tried to outdo each other , so the quality and variety of food and drink available was truly impressive . He should be able to find treats he liked almost as well as chocolate chip cookies , but ones that would n't blow his cover . He walked toward the exhibit-covered landing field , glad that he 'd kept his identity as a Sandeman warrior ; as crowded as the area was , he was given plenty of room to move . He was impressed despite himself by the exhibits , too . Whoever was in charge of this open house had managed to get a heavy destroyer for a static display — and while those were nowhere near as big as the kilometer-diameter battle cruisers , which were far too big to land , they were quite big enough to have the visitors making awed comments . Curious , Nevan walked around the ship until he found its ID — and then he sent another caustic comment to one of the newest gods . * Dammit , Kelly , if you want me to deliver your blades to Owajima , how about some cooperation instead of all these problems ? * The destroyer was the IHD Warleader Riordan , a ship from the Fiftieth Fleet , which meant it was crewed primarily by Sandemans . That was bad enough , but a good percentage on this particular ship were from Clan Leras , so even the ones not directly related to him would know him on sight . And they were n't IntelDiv ; they would n't know not to recognize him . He turned and began walking away , hoping against hope that the crew was still all aboard ship . He 'd been lucky enough not to get caught in such a situation during his active career ; maybe that luck would hold long enough for him to get out of this one . “ Nevan ! ” The happy voice from behind him made it all too clear his luck had changed . He turned and bowed respectfully to the approaching warriors ' - woman in Imperial Marine service black . “ Good day , Lady Morna . You 're looking well. ” She looked at him with affectionate appraisal , and shook her head ruefully . “ I can n't say the same for you , I 'm afraid . How long have you been on the meds ? ” “ Almost a month , ” Nevan admitted . He might have been able to get away with lying to another w ' woman , but the lady Morna could tell — whether by looking or by some form of Talent — almost to the day how long a warrior had been using anti-need medications . And she did n't approve of them being used any longer than was absolutely necessary . “ I thought so . Are you going to be around long enough for me to give you a natural release ? ” Nevan was tempted , but he shook his head . He 'd have to leave as soon as he could ; now that his cover was blown , he had no choice but to give up this try and start over . “ I 'm afraid I have to get back to Terra. ” Morna nodded , glancing at the synthiskin-covered cheek . “ Of course ; I did n't realize . But when you do , promise me that you 'll find a w ' woman or warrior and get a decent natural release. ” “ I will , lady , ” Nevan replied , grateful for her understanding . “ Or a Traiti ; some of the Palace Guard have given me good combat releases. ” “ That will do. ” Morna smiled at him . “ At least you have n't gone six months on the meds , the way you had when I first met you ! But can you stay a little while ? Our autochef bakes good cookies . Including chocolate chip. ” Nevan chuckled , deciding that an hour or so should n't really make any difference . “ I 'd like that ; thanks. ” The receiver in Owajima 's ear chimed softly ; he turned on his throat mike — not the surgically implanted comm unit many ranking Imperials were given , but the external type used as far back as pre-atomic times — and answered . “ Owajima here. ” “ DarLowrie went to the open house , Colonel — and one of those on the destroyer static display recognized him . His name is Nevan , and he has accepted an invitation to visit the ship. ” “ Nevan ! ” Owajima exclaimed . “ What clan , do you know ? ” “ It was not said , but the largest clan group aboard is from Leras. ” “ Ah. ” Owajima was silent for several seconds , absorbing that . “ Is there a tattoo on his right cheek ? ” “ There is not. ” “ Interesting — thank you . I will need some assistance after all , it appears ; I would like to get into his ship with as few traces as possible. ” “ An entry specialist will be with you in ten minutes . Is there anything else ? ” “ Not at the moment . Owajima out. ” So his pursuer 's true name was Nevan , Owajima thought , troubled . And the ship 's largest contingent was from Leras . Knowing both Sandemans and the unconditional nature of the personal fealty oath , he found it hard to believe his pursuer 's identity . What had gone wrong , to turn a Sandeman warrior from thakur-na to renegade assassin ? Or . . . had anything ? If Nevan had either deserted or harmed his chosen lady , it would have been all over the news channels , and there had been nothing . The likelihood , then , was that he was on a mission for her — a mission that somehow concerned him . Owajima smiled slowly at that . Very well , he would take all possible precautions , though he no longer believed they would be necessary . Nevan DarLeras had a powerful and trained Talent , something “ Vance DarLowrie ” had shown no traces of — so he was not using either that or Ranger Losinj 's position to simplify his mission . An exercise of some sort , then — security , in all probability . If true , it could be proven easily , Owajima thought , and he would have the pleasure of meeting his predecessor . Nevan enjoyed both the cookies and the talk , though he kept an eye on the time and did n't let himself relax too much . Owajima was alerted now , and field agents tended to have a rather violent reaction to someone stalking them for unknown purposes . Nevan could n't blame them ; he 'd reacted the same way when one of his net had warned him someone was on his trail . About the best such a pursuer could expect , unless @ was able to ambush the agent first , was that the agent wanted information enough to use a non-lethal form of attack or defense — until @ learned enough to satisfy @' s curiosity , at least . But Nevan was able to put the hazards of his mission in the back of his mind while he caught up on news from home . His first son , with the lady Dallas , was doing well in his warrior training , though both he and his half-brother — Nevan 's with the lady Morna , who looked more than a little smug , telling him — were giving Sean and Ellen fits trying to keep up . Nevan could n't help laughing ; Sean and Ellen had fostered him , too , and he remembered how good they were — and how frustrated Sean got — with a child-warrior 's hyperactivity . Other news was almost as interesting to him , if less personal : the warrior Leslie had broken his leg in war games with the Combat Division Marines stationed at Shangri-La Base , and the clan had been asked to train more assault-lander pilots . The hour was all too short , but Nevan did n't let himself stretch his visit beyond that point . He left the destroyer after a final promise to Morna that he would get off the meds as soon as he could , then made his way through even thicker crowds to his rented car . He spent the drive back to his ship going over his options . Things did n't look quite as unpromising as they had earlier , even though it still seemed that he would have to go back to Terra for a fresh start . This time , he reminded himself , at least the start would n't be from zero ; he had a name and a reputation to work with , and a few days to dig out some background would give him more data . He had resigned himself to starting over by the time he got back to the spaceport . Not even the sight of half a decade secret police making no secret of their surveillance of his ship disturbed him ; he grinned at them as he palmed open the outer hatch of his ship , giving Owajima points for letting the locals handle the presumed assassin . He 'd just have to take more precautions the next time around — Oh , gods , the inner hatch was ajar , and he had n't left it that way ! He barely had time to spot a stunner muzzle in the opening and start reaching for his needler before his ambusher fired and he slumped to the airlock deck . Owajima was a little surprised at the ease of his success , though there was no way even one as skilled as DarLeras was reputed to be could have detected any sign of his entry . He went to the outer lock and signaled his success to the watchers , then carried the Sandeman to his cabin and secured him to the bunk . Then he went into the ‘ fresher , found synthiskin release in the medikit , and used it on the Sandeman 's face , smiling as it peeled free to reveal the tattoo so familiar from news shows . That was conclusive enough for Owajima ; if , contrary to all other evidence , DarLeras had gone renegade , he would have removed the tattoo rather than simply covering it . When Nevan woke , he was spread-eagled , tied to his bunk with a grim-faced Oriental man holding a gun on him . That should have been frightening , but Nevan could n't help grinning ; the feel of air on his cheek instead of synthiskin agreed with the tiny indications he could read from his captor . Owajima was disciplined , beautifully so , but not well enough to hide everything . “ I 'm honored to meet you , Colonel Owajima . Either I 'm losing my edge , or you 're about to take over the top-ever rating ; I should 've seen some sign of your entry on the outer lock. ” “ If you had , it would be I who was losing my edge . However , I will take that as a compliment from one who still holds that ranking . Drop your mind-shield. ” “ What ? Ohhh. ” Nevan did so , surprised for an instant though he knew he should n't be . Since his chosen lady had discovered psionic Talent in humans nine years ago , it had been found that strong Talent was generally linked to strong abilities in one or more other fields . That was n't a direct correlation , since there were multi-field geniuses with none at all , and people with no conventional talents and powerful Talent — but well over ninety percent of the time , conventional and psionic abilities went together . Owajima would n't be the top-rated field agent without exceptional ability — of both types . * Also , unlike most Sandemans ,* came Owajima 's amused thought , * I was eager for Talent training . We both know it is impossible to lie , mind-to-mind , so : you are still thakur-na to Ranger Losinj and on a mission for her ? * * I am , though the mission is partly for her , partly for myself ,* Nevan confirmed . * Stay linked while I report ; she 'll want to commend you personally . * He sensed Owajima 's agreement , and reached for his chosen lady . * Thakur ? * * Here , thakur-na ,* was the immediate response — then Nevan shared her amusement as she ‘ felt ’ his bonds . * You are satisfied with security , then . * * It 's tight ,* Nevan confirmed . * And I 'm really impressed by Major Owajima 's skill . He got past my ship defenses without leaving a trace . It was a beautiful ambush . * * It is he I sense linked with you ? * * Yes , Thakur . * Nevan felt her attention center on the other . * I am pleased to make your acquaintance , Major ,* she sent . * I apologize for any difficulties you experienced as a result of Nevan 's pursuit ; his purpose , at my request , was to test the security protecting field agents , including his target 's self-protection . As you heard , he is satisfied . So am I , and since you proved able to stop him , I will place a commendation in your records . * * Thank you , sir . * Owajima smiled . * It is good to know our protections are adequate against one of the warrior Nevan 's ability ; any other , then , could penetrate them only by chance . * * True . * Corina projected amusement . * Are you on assignment ? * * No , sir . I have just finished a post-mission leave , and have been ordered to Terra for a tour with OSI . * * You wo n't like it ,* Nevan predicted . * Assignments think they 're doing us a favor when they give us a planetside tour — a rest break , I heard one call it — but those always bored me . * * If it gets too bad , Major ,* the Ranger sent sympathetically , * see me , and I will have you given a field assignment . It is the least I can do after setting Nevan on your trail . * * I will , sir , and thank you . * * Before I break contact , thakur-na , is there anything further you need ? * * Not really , Thakur — if you do n't have anything else for me , I 'll offer Major Owajima a ride back to Terra . * * That will be fine . Enjoy the trip — I must endure this reception for Duke Shirley . Until your return , thakur-na . * * Until then , Thakur . * The contact ended , and Nevan grinned up at his captor . “ Satisfied , Major ? ” “ Perfectly , warrior . And I will accept your offer of a ride. ” Owajima holstered his gun , then undid Nevan 's bonds . “ I have wished to meet you for some time ; I regret only the circumstances. ” Nevan sat up , rubbing his wrists . “ Same here , maybe more so . I was after you in particular because my bio-father left you his personal weapons when he died last month. ” “ Oh ? Knowing Sandemans , I assume there was a reason. ” “ Uh-huh . He was the one you gave need-release to on Piper 's World. ” “ Ah. ” Owajima smiled . “ I should not have broken cover to do so , but I had seen one warrior die that way when we were prisoners of the Traiti , and I could not let another go through such agony unaided. ” “ That 's what he told me , not long after I finished my agent 's training . Do you need to get anything before we go ? ” “ No . Had you been the enemy I originally thought , by now you would have been dead and your ship confiscated for my trip , to be turned in to the Navy at the Antarctica base . My things are already aboard. ” Nevan chuckled . “ Good thinking . Unnecessary , since this baby already belongs to the Navy , but I like the plan. ” He led the way to his ship 's control room , got clearance for takeoff , and set course for Terra . Then he escorted his guest to the ship 's small lounge . “ I 've followed your career for a long time , Major , ” he said , getting coffee for each of them . “ It 's been brilliant — at times incredible . Like getting into this ship without leaving traces. ” Owajima smiled . “ I left traces , warrior . Not many , and not significant to one without the training we share , but enough that you would have observed them . My particular Talent specialty , however , is singularly appropriate for one in this field. ” His smile grew . “ I can , when I desire , make myself and my handiwork unnoticeable . It takes a particularly strong mind-shield to block that ability even partially ; you saw nothing because I wished you not to. ” Nevan nodded , returning the smile . “ That makes me feel better . I got blown when I visited the base — did n't know about the open house , and ran into some clan-mates . I was afraid I 'd let that distract me — but if you were using Talent , that was n't my problem . Mind showing me how it works ? ” “ Not at all , though since you are already aware of me , the effect will not be complete. ” If that was incomplete , Nevan thought seconds later , Kiyoshi Owajima must be capable of practically turning invisible . He knew the other was there , could see him perfectly well — but it was almost impossible to pay any attention to him . “ Nice ! I could 've used that quite a few times. ” Owajima became noticeable again . “ It is less effective against a number of people , particularly when — as you did — they know I am present . But against few , or those who have not already seen me when I begin using it , you are quite correct ; it is most effective. ” “ Too bad you can n't teach it to all the agents. ” But that , Nevan knew , was n't possible ; while mind-screen , or the stronger mind-shield , and telepathy were common to everyone with Talent , the specialized aspects varied widely from person to person . “ Would you like to see your inheritance ? ” “ Very much . The needler and blades in the clothing storage ? ” Nevan chuckled . “ That 's them . Do you want to get them , or shall I ? ” “ There is no further need to invade your privacy , warrior. ” “ Nevan is fine — I 'll go get them , then. ” He did so , grinning to himself . He 'd been favorably impressed by the reports of Owajima 's accomplishments ; he was even more favorably impressed by the man himself . Not too many standard humans could take out a Sandeman warrior , even using Talent ! Returning to the lounge , he gave Owajima the box holding the weapons . “ Here you are , Major . Use them in good health. ” “ I shall , whenever my cover does not prohibit the use of Sandeman weapons . And call me Kiyoshi , please. ” Owajima smiled . “ I think this will be an enjoyable trip , and that by its end we will be friends. ” “ I think so , too . Do you have a family ? ” “ I am married , but we do not yet have children . You ? ” “ Two sons , both warriors — one with the lady Dallas , one with the lady Morna . My foster-parents are fostering both of them , as well . I 've got a holo , if you 'd like to see. ” “ Very much. ” Owajima accepted the small folder , settling in for an enjoyable discussion . END