A Scientist Rises By D. W. Hall “ The face of the giant was indeed that of a god .... ” On that summer day the sky over New York was unflecked by clouds , and the air hung motionless , the waves of heat undisturbed . The city was a vast oven where even the sounds of the coiling traffic in its streets seemed heavy and weary under the press of heat that poured down from above . In Washington Square , the urchins of the neighborhood splashed in the fountain , and the usual midday assortment of mothers , tramps and out-of-works lounged listlessly on the hot park benches . All gazed , transfixed , at the vast form that towered above them . As a bowl , the Square was filled by the torrid sun , and the trees and grass drooped like the people on its walks . In the surrounding city , men worked in sweltering offices and the streets rumbled with the never-ceasing tide of business — but Washington Square rested . And then a man walked out of one of the houses lining the square , and all this was changed . He came with a calm , steady stride down the steps of a house on the north side , and those who happened to see him gazed with surprised interest . For he was a giant in size . He measured at least eleven feet in height , and his body was well-formed and in perfect proportion . He crossed the street and stepped over the railing into the nearest patch of grass , and there stood with arms folded and legs a little apart . The expression on his face was preoccupied and strangely apart , nor did it change when , almost immediately from the park bench nearest him , a woman 's excited voice cried : “ Look ! Look ! Oh , look ! ” The people around her craned their necks and stared , and from them grew a startled murmur . Others from farther away came to see who had cried out , and remained to gaze fascinated at the man on the grass . Quickly the murmur spread across the Square , and from its every part men and women and children streamed towards the center of interest — and then , when they saw , backed away slowly and fearfully , with staring eyes , from where the lone figure stood . There was about that figure something uncanny and terrible . There , in the hot midday hush , something was happening to it which men would say could not happen ; and men , seeing it , backed away in alarm . Quickly they dispersed . Soon there were only white , frightened faces peering from behind buildings and trees . Before their very eyes the giant was growing . When he had first emerged , he had been around eleven feet tall , and now , within three minutes , he had risen close to sixteen feet . His great body maintained its perfect proportions . It was that of an elderly man clad simply in a gray business suit . The face was kind , its clear-chiselled features indicating fine spiritual strength ; on the white forehead beneath the sparse gray hair were deep-sunken lines which spoke of years of concentrated work . No thought of malevolence could come from that head with its gentle blue eyes that showed the peace within , but fear struck ever stronger into those who watched him , and in one place a woman fainted ; for the great body continued to grow , and grow ever faster , until it was twenty feet high , then swiftly twenty-five , and the feet , still separated , were as long as the body of a normal boy . Clothes and body grew effortlessly , the latter apparently without pain , as if the terrifying process were wholly natural . The cars coming into Washington Square had stopped as their drivers sighted what was rising there , and by now the bordering streets were tangled with traffic . A distant crowd of milling people heightened the turmoil . The northern edge was deserted , but in a large semicircle was spread a fear-struck , panicky mob . A single policeman , his face white and his eyes wide , tried to straighten out the tangle of vehicles , but it was infinitely beyond him and he sent in a riot call ; and as the giant with the kind , dignified face loomed silently higher than the trees in the Square , and ever higher , a dozen blue-coated figures appeared , and saw , and knew fear too , and hung back awe-stricken , at a loss what to do . For by now the rapidly mounting body had risen to the height of forty feet . An excited voice raised itself above the general hubbub . “ Why , I know him ! I know him ! It 's Edgar Wesley ! Doctor Edgar Wesley ! ” A police sergeant turned to the man who had spoken . “ And it — he knows you ? Then go closer to him , and — and — ask him what it means. ” But the man looked fearfully at the giant and hung back . Even as they talked , his gigantic body had grown as high as the four-storied buildings lining the Square , and his feet were becoming too large for the place where they had first been put . And now a faint smile could be seen on the giant 's face , an enigmatic smile , with something ironic and bitter in it . “ Then shout to him from here , ” pressed the sergeant nervously . “ We 've got to find out something ! This is crazy — impossible ! My God ! Higher yet — and faster ! ” Summoning his courage , the other man cupped his hands about his mouth and shouted : “ Dr. Wesley ! Can you speak and tell us ? Can we help you stop it ? ” The ring of people looked up breathless at the towering figure , and a wave of fear passed over them and several hysterical shrieks rose up as , very slowly , the huge head shook from side to side . But the smile on its lips became stronger , and kinder , and the bitterness seemed to leave it . There was fear at that motion of the enormous head , but a roar of panic sounded from the watchers when , with marked caution , the growing giant moved one foot from the grass into the street behind and the other into the nearby base of Fifth Avenue , just above the Arch . Fearing harm , they were gripped by terror , and they fought back while the trembling policemen tried vainly to control them ; but the panic soon ended when they saw that the leviathan 's arms remained crossed and his smile kinder yet . By now he dwarfed the houses , his body looming a hundred and fifty feet into the sky . At this moment a woman back of the semicircle slumped to her knees and prayed hysterically . “ Someone 's coming out of his house ! ” shouted one of the closest onlookers . The door of the house from which the giant had first appeared had opened , and the figure of a middle-aged , normal-sized man emerged . For a second he crouched on the steps , gaping up at the monstrous shape in the sky , and then he scurried down and made at a desperate run for the nearest group of policemen . He gripped the sergeant and cried frantically : “ That 's Dr. Wesley ! Why do n't you do something ? Why do n't — ” “ Who are you ? ” the officer asked , with some return of an authoritative manner . “ I work for him . I 'm his janitor . But — can n't you do anything ? Look at him ! Look ! ” The crowd pressed closer . “ What do you know about this ? ” went on the sergeant . The man gulped and stared around wildly . “ He 's been working on something — many years — I do n't know what , for he kept it a close secret . All I knew is that an hour ago I was in my room upstairs , when I heard some disturbance in his laboratory , on the ground floor . I came down and knocked on the door , and he answered from inside and said that everything was all right — ” “ You did n't go in ? ” “ No . I went back up , and everything was quiet for a long time . Then I heard a lot of noise down below — a smashing — as if things were being broken . But I thought he was just destroying something he did n't need , and I did n't investigate : he hated to be disturbed . And then , a little later , I heard them shouting out here in the Square , and I looked out and saw . I saw him — just as I knew him — but a giant ! Look at his face ! Why , he has the face of — of a god ! He 's — as if he were looking down on us — and — pitying us .... ” For a moment all were silent as they gazed , transfixed , at the vast form that towered two hundred feet above them . Almost as awe-inspiring as the astounding growth was the fine , dignified calmness of the face . The sergeant broke in : “ The explanation of this must be in his laboratory . We 've got to have a look . You lead us there. ” The other man nodded ; but just then the giant moved again , and they waited and watched . With the utmost caution the titanic shape changed position . Gradually , one great foot , over thirty feet in length , soared up from the street and lowered farther away , and then the other distant foot changed its position ; and the leviathan came gently to rest against the tallest building bordering the Square , and once more folded his arms and stood quiet . The enormous body appeared to waver slightly as a breath of wind washed against it : obviously it was not gaining weight as it grew . Almost , now , it appeared to float in the air . Swiftly it grew another twenty-five feet , and the gray expanse of its clothes shimmered strangely as a ripple ran over its colossal bulk . A change of feeling came gradually over the watching multitude . The face of the giant was indeed that of a god in the noble , irony-tinged serenity of his calm features . It was if a further world had opened , and one of divinity had stepped down ; a further world of kindness and fellow-love , where were none of the discords that bring conflicts and slaughterings to the weary people of Earth . Spiritual peace radiated from the enormous face under the silvery hair , peace with an undertone of sadness , as if the giant knew of the sorrows of the swarm of dwarfs beneath him , and pitied them . From all the roofs and the towers of the city , for miles and miles around , men saw the mammoth shape and the kindly smile grow more and more tenuous against the clear blue sky . The figure remained quietly in the same position , his feet filling two empty streets , and under the spell of his smile all fear seemed to leave the nearer watchers , and they became more quiet and controlled . The group of policemen and the janitor made a dash for the house from which the giant had come . They ascended the steps , went in , and found the door of the laboratory locked . They broke the door down . The sergeant looked in . “ Anyone in here ? ” he cried . Nothing disturbed the silence , and he entered , the others following . A long , wide , dimly-lit room met their eyes , and in its middle the remains of a great mass of apparatus that had dominated it . The apparatus was now completely destroyed . Its dozen rows of tubes were shattered , its intricate coils of wire and machinery hopelessly smashed . Fragments lay scattered all over the floor . No longer was there the least shape of meaning to anything in the room ; there remained merely a litter of glass and stone and scrap metal . Conspicuous on the floor was a large hammer . The sergeant walked over to pick it up , but , instead , paused and stared at what lay beyond it . “ A body ! ” he said . A sprawled out dead man lay on the floor , his dark face twisted up , his sightless eyes staring at the ceiling , his temple crushed as with a hammer . Clutched tight in one stiff hand was an automatic . On his chest was a sheet of paper . The captain reached down and grasped the paper . He read what was written on it , and then he read it to the others : There was a fool who dreamed the high dream of the pure scientist , and who lived only to ferret out the secrets of nature , and harness them for his fellow men . He studied and worked and thought , and in time came to concentrate on the manipulation of the atom , especially the possibility of contracting and expanding it — a thing of greatest potential value . For nine years he worked along this line , hoping to succeed and give new power , new happiness , a new horizon to mankind . Hermetically sealed in his laboratory , self-exiled from human contacts , he labored hard . There came a day when the device into which the fool had poured his life stood completed and a success . And on that very day an agent for a certain government entered his laboratory to steal the device . And in that moment the fool realized what he had done : that , from the apparatus he had invented , not happiness and new freedom would come to his fellow men , but instead slaughter and carnage and drunken power increased a hundredfold . He realized , suddenly , that men had not yet learned to use fruitfully the precious , powerful things given to them , but as yet could only play with them like greedy children — and kill as they played . Already his invention had brought death . And he realized — even on this day of his triumph — that it and its secret must be destroyed , and with them he who had fashioned so blindly . For the scientist was old , his whole life was the invention , and with its going there would be nothing more . And so he used the device 's great powers on his own body ; and then , with those powers working on him , he destroyed the device and all the papers that held its secrets . Was the fool also mad ? Perhaps . But I do not think so . Into his lonely laboratory , with this marauder , had come the wisdom that men must wait , that the time is not yet for such power as he was about to offer . A gesture , his strange death , which you who read this have seen ? Yes , but a useful one , for with it he and his invention and its hurtful secrets go from you ; and a fitting one , for he dies through his achievement , through his very life . But , in a better sense , he will not die , for the power of his achievement will dissolve his very body among you infinitely ; you will breathe him in your air ; and in you he will live incarnate until that later time when another will give you the knowledge he now destroys , and he will see it used as he wished it used .— E . W . The sergeant 's voice ceased , and wordlessly the men in the laboratory looked at each other . No comment was needed . They went out . They watched from the steps of Edgar Wesley 's house . At first sight of the figure in the sky , a new awe struck them , for now the shape of the giant towered a full five hundred feet into the sun , and it seemed almost a mirage , for definite outline was gone from it . It shimmered and wavered against the bright blue like a mist , and the blue shone through it , for it was quite transparent . And yet still they imagined they could discern the slight ironic smile on the face , and the peaceful , understanding light in the serene eyes ; and their hearts swelled at the knowledge of the spirit , of the courage , of the fine , far-seeing mind of that outflung titanic martyr to the happiness of men . The end came quickly . The great misty body rose ; it floated over the city like a wraith , and then it swiftly dispersed , even as steam dissolves in the air . They felt a silence over the thousands of watching people in the Square , a hush broken at last by a deep , low murmur of awe and wonderment as the final misty fragments of the vast sky-held figure wavered and melted imperceptibly — melted and were gone from sight in the air that was breathed by the men whom Edgar Wesley loved .