Letter of the Law by Alan E. Nourse The place was dark and damp , and smelled like moldy leaves . Meyerhoff followed the huge , bear-like Altairian guard down the slippery flagstones of the corridor , sniffing the dead , musty air with distaste . He drew his carefully tailored Terran-styled jacket closer about his shoulders , shivering as his eyes avoided the black , yawning cell-holes they were passing . His foot slipped on the slimy flags from time to time , and finally he paused to wipe the caked mud from his trouser leg . “ How much farther is it ? ” he shouted angrily . The guard waved a heavy paw vaguely into the blackness ahead . Quite suddenly the corridor took a sharp bend , and the Altairian stopped , producing a huge key ring from some obscure fold of his hairy hide . “ I still do n't see any reason for all the fuss , ” he grumbled in a wounded tone . “ We 've treated him like a brother. ” One of the huge steel doors clicked open . Meyerhoff peered into the blackness , catching a vaguely human outline against the back wall . “ Harry ? ” he called sharply . There was a startled gasp from within , and a skinny , gnarled little man suddenly appeared in the guard 's light , like a grotesque , twisted ghost out of the blackness . Wide blue eyes regarded Meyerhoff from beneath uneven black eyebrows , and then the little man 's face broke into a crafty grin . “ Paul ! So they sent you ! I knew I could count on it ! ” He executed a deep , awkward bow , motioning Meyerhoff into the dark cubicle . “ Not much to offer you , ” he said slyly , “ but it 's the best I can do under the circumstances. ” Meyerhoff scowled , and turned abruptly to the guard . “ We 'll have some privacy now , if you please . Interplanetary ruling . And leave us the light. ” The guard grumbled , and started for the door . “ It 's about time you showed up ! ” cried the little man in the cell . “ Great day ! Lucky they sent you , pal . Why , I 've been in here for years — ” “ Look , Zeckler , the name is Meyerhoff , and I 'm not your pal , ” Meyerhoff snapped . “ And you 've been here for two weeks , three days , and approximately four hours . You 're getting as bad as your gentle guards when it comes to bandying the truth around. ” He peered through the dim light at the gaunt face of the prisoner . Zeckler 's face was dark with a week 's beard , and his bloodshot eyes belied the cocky grin on his lips . His clothes were smeared and sodden , streaked with great splotches of mud and moss . Meyerhoff 's face softened a little . “ So Harry Zeckler 's in a jam again , ” he said . “ You look as if they 'd treated you like a brother. ” The little man snorted . “ These overgrown teddy-bears do n't know what brotherhood means , nor humanity , either . Bread and water I 've been getting , nothing more , and then only if they feel like bringing it down. ” He sank wearily down on the rock bench along the wall . “ I thought you 'd never get here ! I sent an appeal to the Terran Consulate the first day I was arrested . What happened ? I mean , all they had to do was get a man over here , get the extradition papers signed , and provide transportation off the planet for me . Why so much time ? I 've been sitting here rotting — ” He broke off in mid-sentence and stared at Meyerhoff . “ You brought the papers , did n't you ? I mean , we can leave now ? ” Meyerhoff stared at the little man with a mixture of pity and disgust . “ You are a prize fool , ” he said finally . “ Did you know that ? ” Zeckler 's eyes widened . “ What do you mean , fool ? So I spend a couple of weeks in this pneumonia trap . The deal was worth it ! I 've got three million credits sitting in the Terran Consulate on Altair V , just waiting for me to walk in and pick them up . Three million credits — do you hear ? That 's enough to set me up for life ! ” Meyerhoff nodded grimly . “ If you live long enough to walk in and pick them up , that is. ” “ What do you mean , if ? ” Meyerhoff sank down beside the man , his voice a tense whisper in the musty cell . “ I mean that right now you are practically dead . You may not know it , but you are . You walk into a newly opened planet with your smart little bag of tricks , walk in here with a shaky passport and no permit , with no knowledge of the natives outside of two paragraphs of inaccuracies in the Explorer 's Guide , and even then you 're not content to come in and sell something legitimate , something the natives might conceivably be able to use . No , nothing so simple for you . You have to pull your usual high-pressure stuff . And this time , buddy , you 're paying the piper. ” “ You mean I 'm not being extradited ? ” Meyerhoff grinned unpleasantly . “ I mean precisely that . You 've committed a crime here — a major crime . The Altairians are sore about it . And the Terran Consulate is n't willing to sell all the trading possibilities here down the river just to get you out of a mess . You 're going to stand trial — and these natives are out to get you . Personally , I think they 're going to get you. ” Zeckler stood up shakily . “ You can n't believe anything the natives say , ” he said uneasily . “ They 're pathological liars . Why , you should see what they tried to sell me ! You 've never seen such a pack of liars as these critters. ” He glanced up at Meyerhoff . “ They 'll probably drop a little fine on me and let me go. ” “ A little fine of one Terran neck. ” Meyerhoff grinned nastily . “ You 've committed the most heinous crime these creatures can imagine , and they 're going to get you for it if it 's the last thing they do . I 'm afraid , my friend , that your con-man days are over. ” Zeckler fished in the other man 's pocket , extracted a cigarette , and lighted it with trembling fingers . “ It 's bad , then , ” he said finally . “ It 's bad , all right. ” Some shadow of the sly , elfin grin crept over the little con-man 's face . “ Well , at any rate , I 'm glad they sent you over , ” he said weakly . “ Nothing like a good lawyer to handle a trial. ” “ Lawyer ? Not me ! Oh , no . Sorry , but no thanks. ” Meyerhoff chuckled . “ I 'm your advisor , old boy . Nothing else . I 'm here to keep you from botching things up still worse for the Trading Commission , that 's all . I would n't get tangled up in a mess with those creatures for anything ! ” He shook his head . “ You 're your own lawyer , Mr. Super-salesman . It 's all your show . And you 'd better get your head out of the sand , or you 're going to lose a case like it 's never been lost before ! ” Meyerhoff watched the man 's pale face , and shook his head . In a way , he thought , it was a pity to see such a change in the rosy-cheeked , dapper , cocksure little man who had talked his way glibly in and out of more jams than Meyerhoff could count . Trading brought scalpers ; it was almost inevitable that where rich and unexploited trading ground was uncovered , it would first fall prey to the fast-trading boys . They spread out from Terra with the first wave of exploration — the slick , fast-talking con-men who could work new territories unfettered by the legal restrictions that soon closed down the more established planets . The first men in were the richest out , and through some curious quirk of the Terrestrial mind , they knew they could count on Terran protection , however crooked and underhand their methods . But occasionally a situation arose where the civilization and social practices of the alien victims made it unwise to tamper with them . Altair I had been recognized at once by the Trading Commission as a commercial prize of tremendous value , but early reports had warned of the danger of wildcat trading on the little , musty , jungle-like planet with its shaggy , three-eyed inhabitants — warned specifically against the confidence tactics so frequently used — but there was always somebody , Meyerhoff reflected sourly , who just did n't get the word . Zeckler puffed nervously on his cigarette , his narrow face a study in troubled concentration . “ But I did n't do anything ! ” he exploded finally . “ So I pulled an old con game . So what ? Why should they get so excited ? So I clipped a few thousand credits , pulled a little fast business. ” He shrugged eloquently , spreading his hands . “ Everybody 's doing it . They do it to each other without batting an eye . You should see these critters operate on each other . Why , my little scheme was peanuts by comparison. ” Meyerhoff pulled a pipe from his pocket , and began stuffing the bowl with infinite patience . “ And precisely what sort of con game was it ? ” he asked quietly . Zeckler shrugged again . “ The simplest , tiredest , moldiest old racket that ever made a quick nickel . Remember the old Terran gag about the Brooklyn Bridge ? The same thing . Only these critters did n't want bridges . They wanted land — this gooey , slimy swamp they call ‘ farm land. ’ So I gave them what they wanted . I just sold them some land. ” Meyerhoff nodded fiercely . “ You sure did . A hundred square kilos at a swipe . Only you sold the same hundred square kilos to a dozen different natives. ” Suddenly he threw back his hands and roared . “ Of all the things you should n't have done — ” “ But what 's a chunk of land ? ” Meyerhoff shook his head hopelessly . “ If you had n't been so greedy , you 'd have found out what a chunk of land was to these natives before you started peddling it . You 'd have found out other things about them , too . You 'd have learned that in spite of all their bumbling and fussing and squabbling they 're not so dull . You 'd have found out that they 're marsupials , and that two out of five of them get thrown out of their mother 's pouch before they 're old enough to survive . You 'd have realized that they have to start fighting for individual rights almost as soon as they 're born . Anything goes , as long as it benefits them as individuals. ” Meyerhoff grinned at the little man 's horrified face . “ Never heard of that , had you ? And you 've never heard of other things , too . You 've probably never heard that there are just too many Altairians here for the food their planet can supply , and their diet is so finicky that they just can n't live on anything that does n't grow here . And consequently , land is the key factor in their economy , not money ; nothing but land . To get land , it 's every man for himself , and the loser starves , and their entire legal and monetary system revolves on that principle . They 've built up the most confusing and impossible system of barter and trade imaginable , aimed at individual survival , with land as the value behind the credit . That explains the lying — of course they 're liars , with an economy like that . They 've completely missed the concept of truth . Pathological ? You bet they 're pathological ! Only a fool would tell the truth when his life depended on his being a better liar than the next guy ! Lying is the time-honored tradition , with their entire legal system built around it. ” Zeckler snorted . “ But how could they possibly have a legal system ? I mean , if they do n't recognize the truth when it slaps them in the face ? ” Meyerhoff shrugged . “ As we understand legal systems , I suppose they do n't have one . They have only the haziest idea what truth represents , and they 've shrugged off the idea as impossible and useless. ” He chuckled maliciously . “ So you went out and found a chunk of ground in the uplands , and sold it to a dozen separate , self-centered , half-starved natives ! Encroachment on private property is legal grounds for murder on this planet , and twelve of them descended on the same chunk of land at the same time , all armed with title-deeds. ” Meyerhoff sighed . “ You 've got twelve mad Altairians in your hair . You 've got a mad planet in your hair . And in the meantime , Terra 's most valuable uranium source in five centuries is threatening to cut off supply unless they see your blood splattered liberally all the way from here to the equator. ” Zeckler was visibly shaken . “ Look , ” he said weakly , “ so I was n't so smart . What am I going to do ? I mean , are you going to sit quietly by and let them butcher me ? How could I defend myself in a legal setup like this ? ” Meyerhoff smiled coolly . “ You 're going to get your sly little con-man brain to working , I think , ” he said softly . “ By Interplanetary Rules , they have to give you a trial in Terran legal form — judge , jury , court procedure , all that folderol . They think it 's a big joke — after all , what could a judicial oath mean to them ?— but they agreed . Only thing is , they 're going to hang you , if they die trying . So you 'd better get those stunted little wits of yours clicking — and if you try to implicate me , even a little bit , I 'll be out of there so fast you wo n't know what happened. ” With that Meyerhoff walked to the door . He jerked it inward sharply , and spilled two guards over on their faces . “ Privacy , ” he grunted , and started back up the slippery corridor . It certainly looked like a courtroom , at any rate . In the front of the long , damp stone room was a bench , with a seat behind it , and a small straight chair to the right . To the left was a stand with twelve chairs — larger chairs , with a railing running along the front . The rest of the room was filled almost to the door with seats facing the bench . Zeckler followed the shaggy-haired guard into the room , nodding approvingly . “ Not such a bad arrangement , ” he said . “ They must have gotten the idea fast. ” Meyerhoff wiped the perspiration from his forehead , and shot the little con-man a stony glance . “ At least you 've got a courtroom , a judge , and a jury for this mess . Beyond that — ” He shrugged eloquently . “ I can n't make any promises. ” In the back of the room a door burst open with a bang . Loud , harsh voices were heard as half a dozen of the huge Altairians attempted to push through the door at once . Zeckler clamped on the headset to his translator unit , and watched the hubbub in the anteroom with growing alarm . Finally the question of precedent seemed to be settled , and a group of the Altairians filed in , in order of stature , stalking across the room in flowing black robes , pug-nosed faces glowering with self-importance . They descended upon the jury box , grunting and scrapping with each other for the first-row seats , and the judge took his place with obvious satisfaction behind the heavy wooden bench . Finally , the prosecuting attorney appeared , flanked by two clerks , who took their places beside him . The prosecutor eyed Zeckler with cold malevolence , then turned and delivered a sly wink at the judge . In a moment the room was a hubbub as it filled with the huge , bumbling , bear-like creatures , jostling each other and fighting for seats , growling and complaining . Two small fights broke out in the rear , but were quickly subdued by the group of gendarmes guarding the entrance . Finally the judge glared down at Zeckler with all three eyes , and pounded the bench top with a wooden mallet until the roar of activity subsided . The jurymen wriggled uncomfortably in their seats , exchanging winks , and finally turned their attention to the front of the court . “ We are reading the case of the people of Altair I , ” the judge 's voice roared out , “ against one Harry Zeckler — ” he paused for a long , impressive moment —" Terran. ” The courtroom immediately burst into an angry growl , until the judge pounded the bench five or six times more . “ This — creature — is hereby accused of the following crimes , ” the judge bellowed . “ Conspiracy to overthrow the government of Altair I . Brutal murder of seventeen law-abiding citizens of the village of Karzan at the third hour before dawn in the second period after his arrival . Desecration of the Temple of our beloved Goddess Zermat , Queen of the Harvest . Conspiracy with the lesser gods to cause the unprecedented drought in the Dermatti section of our fair globe . Obscene exposure of his pouch-marks in a public square . Four separate and distinct charges of jail-break and bribery — ” The judge pounded the bench for order —" Espionage with the accursed scum of Altair II in preparation for interplanetary invasion. ” The little con-man 's jaw sagged lower and lower , the color draining from his face . He turned , wide-eyed , to Meyerhoff , then back to the judge . “ The Chairman of the Jury , ” said the Judge succinctly , “ will read the verdict. ” The little native in the front of the jury-box popped up like a puppet on a string . “ Defendant found guilty on all counts , ” he said . “ Defendant is guilty ! The court will pronounce sentence — ” “ Now wait a minute ! ” Zeckler was on his feet , wild-eyed . “ What kind of railroad job — ” The judge blinked disappointedly at Paul Meyerhoff . “ Not yet ? ” he asked , unhappily . “ No. ” Meyerhoff 's hands twitched nervously . “ Not yet , Your Honor . Later , Your Honor . The trial comes first. ” The judge looked as if his candy had been stolen . “ But you said I should call for the verdict. ” “ Later . You have to have the trial before you can have the verdict. ” The Altairian shrugged indifferently . “ Now — later — ” he muttered . “ Have the prosecutor call his first witness , ” said Meyerhoff . Zeckler leaned over , his face ashen . “ These charges , ” he whispered . “ They 're insane ! ” “ Of course they are , ” Meyerhoff whispered back . “ But what am I going to — ” “ Sit tight . Let them set things up. ” “ But those lies . They 're liars , the whole pack of them — ” He broke off as the prosecutor roared a name . The shaggy brute who took the stand was wearing a bright purple hat which sat rakishly over one ear . He grinned the Altairian equivalent of a hungry grin at the prosecutor . Then he cleared his throat and started . “ This Terran riffraff — ” “ The oath , ” muttered the judge . “ We 've got to have the oath. ” The prosecutor nodded , and four natives moved forward , carrying huge inscribed marble slabs to the front of the court . One by one the chunks were reverently piled in a heap at the witness 's feet . The witness placed a huge , hairy paw on the cairn , and the prosecutor said , “ Do you swear to tell the truth , the whole truth , and nothing but the truth , so help you — ” he paused to squint at the paper in his hand , and finished on a puzzled note , “ — Goddess ? ” The witness removed the paw from the rock pile long enough to scratch his ear . Then he replaced it , and replied , “ Of course , ” in an injured tone . “ Then tell this court what you have seen of the activities of this abominable wretch. ” The witness settled back into the chair , fixing one eye on Zeckler 's face , another on the prosecutor , and closing the third as if in meditation . “ I think it happened on the fourth night of the seventh crossing of Altair II ( may the Goddess cast a drought upon it )— or was it the seventh night of the fourth crossing ?— ” he grinned apologetically at the judge —" when I was making my way back through town toward my blessed land-plot , minding my own business , Your Honor , after weeks of bargaining for the crop I was harvesting . Suddenly from the shadow of the building , this creature — ” he waved a paw at Zeckler —" stopped me in my tracks with a vicious cry . He had a weapon I 'd never seen before , and before I could find my voice he forced me back against the wall . I could see by the cruel glint in his eyes that there was no warmth , no sympathy in his heart , that I was — ” “ Objection ! ” Zeckler squealed plaintively , jumping to his feet . “ This witness can n't even remember what night he 's talking about ! ” The judge looked startled . Then he pawed feverishly through his bundle of notes . “ Overruled , ” he said abruptly . “ Continue , please. ” The witness glowered at Zeckler . “ As I was saying before this loutish interruption , ” he muttered , “ I could see that I was face to face with the most desperate of criminal types , even for Terrans . Note the shape of his head , the flabbiness of his ears . I was petrified with fear . And then , helpless as I was , this two-legged abomination began to shower me with threats of evil to my blessed home , dark threats of poisoning my land unless I would tell him where he could find the resting place of our blessed Goddess — ” “ I never saw him before in my life , ” Zeckler moaned to Meyerhoff . “ Listen to him ! Why should I care where their Goddess — ” Meyerhoff gave him a stony look . “ The Goddess runs things around here . She makes it rain . If it does n't rain , somebody 's insulted her . It 's very simple. ” “ But how can I fight testimony like that ? ” “ I doubt if you can fight it. ” “ But they can n't prove a word of it — ” He looked at the jury , who were listening enraptured to the second witness on the stand . This one was testifying regarding the butcherous slaughter of eighteen ( or was it twenty-three ? Oh , yes , twenty-three ) women and children in the suburban village of Karzan . The pogrom , it seemed , had been accomplished by an energy weapon which ate great , gaping holes in the sides of buildings . A third witness took the stand , continuing the drone as the room grew hotter and muggier . Zeckler grew paler and paler , his eyes turning glassy as the testimony piled up . “ But it 's not true , ” he whispered to Meyerhoff . “ Of course it is n't ! Ca n't you understand ? These people have no regard for truth . It 's stupid , to them , silly , a mark of low intelligence . The only thing in the world they have any respect for is a liar bigger and more skillful than they are. ” Zeckler jerked around abruptly as he heard his name bellowed out . “ Does the defendant have anything to say before the jury delivers the verdict ? ” “ Do I have — ” Zeckler was across the room in a flash , his pale cheeks suddenly taking on a feverish glow . He sat down gingerly on the witness chair , facing the judge , his eyes bright with fear and excitement . “ Your — Your Honor , I — I have a statement to make which will have a most important bearing on this case . You must listen with the greatest care. ” He glanced quickly at Meyerhoff , and back to the judge . “ Your Honor , ” he said in a hushed voice . “ You are in gravest of danger . All of you . Your lives — your very land is at stake. ” The judge blinked , and shuffled through his notes hurriedly as a murmur arose in the court . “ Our land ? ” “ Your lives , your land , everything you hold dear , ” Zeckler said quickly , licking his lips nervously . “ You must try to understand me — ” he glanced apprehensively over his shoulder “ now , because I may not live long enough to repeat what I am about to tell you — ” The murmur quieted down , all ears straining in their headsets to hear his words . “ These charges , ” he continued , “ all of them — they 're perfectly true . At least , they seem to be perfectly true . But in every instance , I was working with heart and soul , risking my life , for the welfare of your beautiful planet. ” There was a loud hiss from the back of the court . Zeckler frowned and rubbed his hands together . “ It was my misfortune , ” he said , “ to go to the wrong planet when I first came to Altair from my homeland on Terra . I — I landed on Altair II , a grave mistake , but as it turned out , a very fortunate error . Because in attempting to arrange trading in that frightful place , I made certain contacts. ” His voice trembled , and sank lower . “ I learned the horrible thing which is about to happen to this planet , at the hands of those barbarians . The conspiracy is theirs , not mine . They have bribed your Goddess , flattered her and lied to her , coerced her all-powerful goodness to their own evil interests , preparing for the day when they could persuade her to cast your land into the fiery furnace of a ten-year-drought — ” Somebody in the middle of the court burst out laughing . One by one the natives nudged one another , and booed , and guffawed , until the rising tide of racket drowned out Zeckler 's words . “ The defendant is obviously lying , ” roared the prosecutor over the pandemonium . “ Any fool knows that the Goddess can n't be bribed . How could she be a Goddess if she could ? ” Zeckler grew paler . “ But — perhaps they were very clever — ” “ And how could they flatter her , when she knows , beyond doubt , that she is the most exquisitely radiant creature in all the Universe ? And you dare to insult her , drag her name in the dirt. ” The hisses grew louder , more belligerent . Cries of “ Butcher him ! ” and “ Scald his bowels ! ” rose from the courtroom . The judge banged for silence , his eyes angry . “ Unless the defendant wishes to take up more of our precious time with these ridiculous lies , the jury — ” “ Wait ! Your Honor , I request a short recess before I present my final plea. ” “ Recess ? ” “ A few moments to collect my thoughts , to arrange my case. ” The judge settled back with a disgusted snarl . “ Do I have to ? ” he asked Meyerhoff . Meyerhoff nodded . The judge shrugged , pointing over his shoulder to the anteroom . “ You can go in there , ” he said . Somehow , Zeckler managed to stumble from the witness stand , amid riotous boos and hisses , and tottered into the anteroom . Zeckler puffed hungrily on a cigarette , and looked up at Meyerhoff with haunted eyes . “ It — it does n't look so good , ” he muttered . Meyerhoff 's eyes were worried , too . For some reason , he felt a surge of pity and admiration for the haggard con-man . “ It 's worse than I 'd anticipated , ” he admitted glumly . “ That was a good try , but you just do n't know enough about them and their Goddess. ” He sat down wearily . “ I do n't see what you can do . They want your blood , and they 're going to have it . They just wo n't believe you , no matter how big a lie you tell. ” Zeckler sat in silence for a moment . “ This lying business , ” he said finally , “ exactly how does it work ? ” “ The biggest , most convincing liar wins . It 's as simple as that . It does n't matter how outlandish a whopper you tell . Unless , of course , they 've made up their minds that you just naturally are n't as big a liar as they are . And it looks like that 's just what they 've done . It would n't make any difference to them what you say — unless , somehow , you could make them believe it. ” Zeckler frowned . “ And how do they regard the — the biggest liar ? I mean , how do they feel toward him ? ” Meyerhoff shifted uneasily . “ It 's hard to say . It 's been my experience that they respect him highly — maybe even fear him a little . After all , the most convincing liar always wins in any transaction , so he gets more land , more food , more power . Yes , I think the biggest liar could go where he pleased without any interference. ” Zeckler was on his feet , his eyes suddenly bright with excitement . “ Wait a minute , ” he said tensely . “ To tell them a lie that they 'd have to believe — a lie they simply could n't help but believe — ” He turned on Meyerhoff , his hands trembling . “ Do they think the way we do ? I mean , with logic , cause and effect , examining evidence and drawing conclusions ? Given certain evidence , would they have to draw the same conclusions that we have to draw ? ” Meyerhoff blinked . “ Well — yes . Oh , yes , they 're perfectly logical. ” Zeckler 's eyes flashed , and a huge grin broke out on his sallow face . His thin body fairly shook . He started hopping up and down on one foot , staring idiotically into space . “ If I could only think — ” he muttered . “ Somebody — somewhere — something I read. ” “ Whatever are you talking about ? ” “ It was a Greek , I think — ” Meyerhoff stared at him . “ Oh , come now . Have you gone off your rocker completely ? You 've got a problem on your hands , man. ” “ No , no , I 've got a problem in the bag ! ” Zeckler 's cheeks flushed . “ Let 's go back in there — I think I 've got an answer ! ” The courtroom quieted the moment they opened the door , and the judge banged the gavel for silence . As soon as Zeckler had taken his seat on the witness stand , the judge turned to the head juryman . “ Now , then , ” he said with happy finality . “ The jury — ” “ Hold on ! Just one minute more. ” The judge stared down at Zeckler as if he were a bug on a rock . “ Oh , yes . You had something else to say . Well , go ahead and say it. ” Zeckler looked sharply around the hushed room . “ You want to convict me , ” he said softly , “ in the worst sort of way . Is n't that right ? ” Eyes swung toward him . The judge broke into an evil grin . “ That 's right. ” “ But you can n't really convict me until you 've considered carefully any statement I make in my own defense . Is n't that right ? ” The judge looked uncomfortable . “ If you 've got something to say , go ahead and say it. ” “ I 've got just one statement to make . Short and sweet . But you 'd better listen to it , and think it out carefully before you decide that you really want to convict me. ” He paused , and glanced slyly at the judge . “ You do n't think much of those who tell the truth , it seems . Well , put this statement in your record , then. ” His voice was loud and clear in the still room . “ All Earthmen are absolutely incapable of telling the truth. ” Puzzled frowns appeared on the jury 's faces . One or two exchanged startled glances , and the room was still as death . The judge stared at him , and then at Meyerhoff , then back . “ But you "— he stammered . “ You 're "— He stopped in mid-sentence , his jaw sagging . One of the jurymen let out a little squeak , and fainted dead away . It took , all in all , about ten seconds for the statement to soak in . And then pandemonium broke loose in the courtroom . “ Really , ” said Harry Zeckler loftily , “ it was so obvious I 'm amazed that it did n't occur to me first thing. ” He settled himself down comfortably in the control cabin of the Interplanetary Rocket and grinned at the outline of Altair IV looming larger in the view screen . Paul Meyerhoff stared stonily at the controls , his lips compressed angrily . “ You might at least have told me what you were planning. ” “ And take the chance of being overheard ? Do n't be silly . It had to come as a bombshell . I had to establish myself as a liar — the prize liar of them all , but I had to tell the sort of lie that they simply could not cope with . Something that would throw them into such utter confusion that they would n't dare convict me. ” He grinned impishly at Meyerhoff . “ The paradox of Epimenides the Cretan . It really stopped them cold . They knew I was an Earthmen , which meant that my statement that Earthmen were liars was a lie , which meant that maybe I was n't a liar , in which case — oh , it was tailor-made. ” “ It sure was. ” Meyerhoff 's voice was a snarl . “ Well , it made me out a liar in a class they could n't approach , did n't it ? ” Meyerhoff 's face was purple with anger . “ Oh , indeed it did ! And it put all Earthmen in exactly the same class , too. ” “ So what 's honor among thieves ? I got off , did n't I ? ” Meyerhoff turned on him fiercely . “ Oh , you got off just fine . You scared the living daylights out of them . And in an eon of lying they never have run up against a short-circuit like that . You 've also completely botched any hope of ever setting up a trading alliance with Altair I , and that includes uranium , too . Smart people do n't gamble with loaded dice . You scared them so badly they do n't want anything to do with us. ” Zeckler 's grin broadened , and he leaned back luxuriously . “ Ah , well . After all , the Trading Alliance was your outlook , was n't it ? What a pity ! ” He clucked his tongue sadly . “ Me , I 've got a fortune in credits sitting back at the consulate waiting for me — enough to keep me on silk for quite a while , I might say . I think I 'll just take a nice , long vacation. ” Meyerhoff turned to him , and a twinkle of malignant glee appeared in his eyes . “ Yes , I think you will . I 'm quite sure of it , in fact . Wo n't cost you a cent , either. ” “ Eh ? ” Meyerhoff grinned unpleasantly . He brushed an imaginary lint fleck from his lapel , and looked up at Zeckler slyly . “ That — uh — jury trial . The Altairians were n't any too happy to oblige . They wanted to execute you outright . Thought a trial was awfully silly — until they got their money back , of course . Not too much — just three million credits. ” Zeckler went white . “ But that money was in banking custody ! ” “ Is that right ? My goodness . You do n't suppose they could have lost those papers , do you ? ” Meyerhoff grinned at the little con-man . “ And incidentally , you 're under arrest , you know. ” A choking sound came from Zeckler 's throat . “ Arrest ! ” “ Oh , yes . Did n't I tell you ? Conspiring to undermine the authority of the Terran Trading Commission . Serious charge , you know . Yes , I think we 'll take a nice long vacation together , straight back to Terra . And there I think you 'll face a jury trial. ” Zeckler spluttered . “ There 's no evidence — you 've got nothing on me ! What kind of a frame are you trying to pull ? ” “ A lovely frame . Airtight . A frame from the bottom up , and you 're right square in the middle . And this time — ” Meyerhoff tapped a cigarette on his thumb with happy finality —" this time I do n't think you 'll get off. ”