From where had these attacking Indians come ? Out of a long forgotten and dim past ? Had their medicine man seen the one supreme vision ? the hohokam dig by ... Theodore Pratt At first they thought the attack was a joke . And then they realized the truth ! At first the two scientists thought the Indian attack on them was a joke perpetrated by some of their friends . After all , modern Indians did not attack white men any more . Except that these did . George Arthbut and Sidney Hunt were both out of New York , on the staff of the Natural History Museum . George was an ethnologist who specialized in what could be reconstructed about the prehistoric Indians of North America , with emphasis on those of the Southwest . He was a tall , lean , gracious bald man in his early sixties . Sidney was an archeologist who was fascinated by the ruins of the same kind of ancient Indians . Medium-sized , with black hair that belied his sixty-five years , he and George made an excellent team , being the leaders in their field . They had come west on a particular bit of business this spring , trying to solve the largest question that remained about the old cliff dwellers and the prehistoric desert Indians , both of whom had deserted their villages and gone elsewhere for reasons that remained a mystery . One theory was that drought had driven them both away . Another theory ran to the effect that enemies wiped them out or made off with them as captives . Still another supposition , at least for the Hohokam desert people , the builders of Casa Grande whose impressive ruins still stood near Coolidge , had to do with their land giving out so they could no longer grow crops , forcing them to go elsewhere to find better soil . No one really knew . It was all pure guesswork . The two scientists meant to spend the entire summer trying to solve this riddle for all time , concentrating on it to the exclusion of everything else . They drove west in a station wagon stuffed with equipment and tracking a U-Haul-It packed with more . George drove , on a road that was only two sand tracks across the wild empty desert between Casa Grande Monument and Tonto National Monument where cliff dwellers had lived . It was here , not far ahead , in new ruins that were being excavated , that they hoped to solve the secret of the exodus of the prehistoric Indians . The place was known as the Hohokam Dig . They topped a rise of ground and came to the site of the dig . Here the sand tracks ended right in the middle of long trenches dug out to reveal thick adobe walls . In the partially bared ruins the outline of a small village could be seen ; the detailed excavation would be done this summer by workmen who would arrive from Phoenix and Tucson . George stopped their caravan and the two men got out , stretching their legs . They looked about , both more interested in the dig , now they were back at it , than setting up camp . They walked around , examining various parts of it , and the excitement of the promise of things to be discovered in the earth came to them . “ This summer we 'll learn the answer , ” Sidney predicted . With skeptical hope George replied , “ Maybe. ” It was early afternoon when they set up camp , getting out their tent from the U-Haul-It . They took out most of their gear , even setting up a portable TV set run on batteries brought along . They worked efficiently and rapidly , having done this many times before and having their equipment well organized from long experience . By the middle of the afternoon all was ready and they rested , sitting on folding chairs at a small table just outside the opening of their tent . Looking around at the dig Sidney remarked , “ Would n't it be easy if we could talk to some of the people who once lived here ? ” “ There 's a few questions I 'd like to ask them , ” said George . “ I certainly wish we had some to talk with. ” He had no more than uttered this casual wish than there sounded , from all sides of where they sat , screeching whoops . The naked brown men who suddenly appeared seemed to materialize from right out of the excavations . As they yelled they raised their weapons . The air was filled , for an instant , with what looked like long arrows . Most of them whistled harmlessly past the two scientists , but one hit the side of the station wagon , making a resounding thump and leaving a deep dent , while two buried themselves in the wood of the U-Haul-It and remained there , quivering . George and Sidney , after the shock of their first surprise at this attack , leaped to their feet . “ The car ! ” cried Sidney . “ Let 's get out of here ! ” They both started to move . Then George stopped and grabbed Sidney 's arm . “ Wait ! ” “ Wait ? ” Sidney demanded . “ They 'll kill us ! ” “ Look , ” advised George , indicating the red men who surrounded them ; they now made no further move of attack . George gazed about . “ Oh , ” he said , “ you think somebody 's playing a joke on us ? ” “ Could be , ” said George . He ran one hand over his bald head . “ Some dear friends , ” Sidney went on , resenting the scare that had been thrown into them , “ hired some Indians to pretend to attack us ? ” “ Maybe Pimas , ” said George . He peered at the Indians , who now were jabbering among themselves and making lamenting sounds as they glanced about at the ruins of the ancient village . There were eighteen of them . They were clad in nothing more than a curious cloth of some kind run between their legs and up and over a cord about their waists , to form a short apron , front and back . “ Or Zunis , ” said Sidney . “ Maybe Maricopas , ” said George . “ Except , ” Sidney observed , “ none of them look like those kind of Indians . And those arrows they shot. ” He stared at the two sticking in the U-Haul-It . “ Those are n't arrows , George — they 're atlatl lances ! ” “ Yes , ” said George . Sidney breathed , “ They are n't holding bows — they 've got atlatls ! ” “ No modern Indian of any kind , ” said George , “ uses an atlatl. ” “ Most of them would n't even know what it was , ” Sidney agreed . “ They have n't been used for hundreds of years ; the only place you see them is in museums. ” An atlatl was the weapon which had replaced the stone axe in the stone age . It was a throwing stick consisting of two parts . One was the lance , a feathered shaft up to four feet long , tipped with a stone point . The two-foot flat stick that went with this had a slot in one end and two rawhide finger loops . The lance end was fitted in the slot to be thrown . The stick was an extension of the human arm to give the lance greater force . Some atlatls had small charm stones attached to them to give them extra weight and magic . Charm stones could be seen fastened to a few of the atlatls being held by the Indians now standing like bronze statues regarding them . George whispered , “ What do you make of it ? ” “ It is n't any joke , ” replied Sidney . He gazed tensely at the Indians . “ That 's all I 'm sure of. ” “ Have you noticed their breechclouts ? ” Sidney stared again . “ They are n't modern clouts . George , they 're right out of Hohokam culture ! ” “ They are n't made of cloth , either . That 's plaited yucca fibre. ” “ Just like we 've dug up many times . Only here ... ” George faltered . “ It 's being worn by — by I do n't know what. ” “ Look at their ornaments. ” Necklaces , made of pierced colored stones , hung about many of the brown necks . Shell bracelets were to be seen , and here and there a carved piece of turquoise appeared . “ Look at the Indian over there , ” George urged . Sidney looked to the side where George indicated , and croaked , “ It 's a girl ! ” It was a girl indeed . She stood straight and magnificent in body completely bare except for the brief apron at her loins . Between her beautiful full copper breasts there hung a gleaming piece of turquoise carved in the shape of a coyote . At her side stood a tall young Indian with a handsome face set with great pride . On her other side was a wizened little old fellow with a wrinkled face and ribs corrugated like a saguaro . Sidney turned back and demanded , “ What do you make of this ? Are we seeing things ? ” Hopefully , he suggested , “ A mirage or sort of a mutual hallucination ? ” In a considered , gauging tone George replied , “ They 're real. ” “ Real ? ” cried Sidney . “ What do you mean , real ? ” “ Real in a way . I mean , Sidney , these — I sound crazy to myself saying it — but I think these are — well , Sid , maybe they 're actual prehistoric Indians. ” “ Huh ? ” “ Well , let 's put it this way : We asked for them and we got them. ” Sidney stared , shocked at George 's statement . “ You 're crazy , all right , ” he said . “ Hohokams in the middle of the Twentieth Century ? ” “ I did n't say they 're Hohokams , though they probably are , of the village here. ” “ You said they 're prehistoric , ” Sidney accused . He quavered , “ Just how could they be ? ” “ Sid , you remember in our Indian studies , again and again , we meet the medicine man who has visions . Even modern ones have done things that are pretty impossible to explain . I believe they have spiritual powers beyond the capability of the white man . The prehistoric medicine men may have developed this power even more . I think the old man there is their medicine man. ” “ So ? ” Sidney invited . “ I 'm just supposing now , mind you , ” George went on . He rubbed his bald pate again as though afraid of what thoughts were taking place under it . “ Maybe way back — a good many hundreds of years ago — this medicine man decided to have a vision of the future . And it worked . And here he is now with some of his people. ” “ Wait a minute , ” Sidney objected . “ So he had this vision and transported these people to this moment in time . But if it was hundreds of years ago they 're already dead , been dead for a long time , so how could they — ” “ Do n't you see , Sid ? They can be dead , but their appearance in the future — for them — could n't occur until now because it 's happened with us and we were n't living and did n't come along here at the right time until this minute. ” Sidney swallowed . “ Maybe , ” he muttered , “ maybe. ” “ Another thing , ” George said . “ If we can talk with them we can learn everything we 've tried to know in all our work and solve in a minute what we 're ready to spend the whole summer , even years , digging for. ” Sidney brightened . “ That 's what we wanted to do. ” George studied the Indians again . “ I think they 're just as surprised as we are . When they discovered themselves here and saw us — and you must remember we 're the first white men they 've ever seen — their immediate instinct was to attack . Now that we do n't fight back they 're waiting for us to make a move. ” “ What do we do ? ” “ Take it easy , ” advised George . “ Do n't look scared and do n't look belligerent . Look friendly and hope some of the modern Indian dialects we know can make connection with them. ” The two scientists began , at a gradual pace , to make their way toward the old man , the young man , and the girl . As they approached , the girl drew back slightly . The young man reached over his shoulder and from the furred quiver slung on his back drew an atlatl lance and fitted it to his throwing stick , holding it ready . The other warriors , all about , followed suit . The medicine man alone stepped forward . He held up a short colored stick to which bright feathers were attached and shook it at the two white men . They stopped . “ That 's his aspergill , ” observed Sidney . “ I 'd like to have that one. ” The medicine man spoke . At first the scientists were puzzled , then George told Sidney , “ That 's Pima , or pretty close to it , just pronounced differently . It probably shows we were right in thinking the Pimas descended from these people . He wants to know who we are. ” George gave their names . The medicine man replied , “ The man who has white skin instead of red speaks our language in a strange way . I am Huk. ” He turned to the young man at his side and said , “ This is Good Fox , our young chief. ” He indicated the girl . “ That is Moon Water , his wife. ” George explained what he and the other white man with him were doing here . Huk , along with all the other Indians , including Good Fox and Moon Water , listened intently ; they seemed greatly excited and disturbed . When George was finished Good Fox turned to Huk and said , “ You have succeeded , wise one , in bringing us forward , far in the future to the time of these men with white skins. ” “ This is the truth , ” said the wrinkled Huk ; he did not boast but rather seemed awed . Moon Water spoke in a frightened tone . She looked about at the partially excavated ruins and asked , “ But what has happened to our village ? ” She faltered , “ Is this the way it will look in the future ? ” “ It is the way , ” Good Fox informed her sorrowfully . “ I weep for our people , ” she said . “ I do not want to see it. ” She hung her pretty face over her bare body , then , in a moment , raised it resolutely . Good Fox shook the long scraggly black hair away from his eyes and told the white men , “ We did not mean to harm you . We did not know what else to do upon finding you here and our village buried. ” Ignoring that in his excited interest , Sidney asked , “ What year are you ? ” “ Year ? ” asked Good Fox . “ What is this word ? ” Both Sidney and George tried to get over to him what year meant in regard to a date in history , but Good Fox , Huk , and Moon Water , and none of the others could understand . “ We do not know what you mean , ” Huk said . “ We know only that we live here in this village — not as you see it now — but one well built and alive with our people . As the medicine man I am known to have extra power and magic in visions . Often I have wondered what life would be like in the far future . With this group I conjured up a vision of it , carrying them and myself to what is now here before us. ” George and Sidney glanced at each other . George 's lips twitched and those of Sidney trembled . George said softly to the Indians , “ Let us be friends. ” He explained to them what they were doing here . “ We are trying to find out what you were — are — like . Especially what made you desert people leave your villages. ” They looked blank . Huk said , “ But we have not left — except in this vision. ” In an aside to George , Sidney said , “ That means we 've caught them before they went south or wherever they went. ” He turned back to Huk . “ Have the cliff people yet deserted their dwellings ? ” Huk nodded solemnly . “ They have gone . Some of them have joined us here , and more have gone to other villages. ” “ We have read that into the remains of your people , especially at Casa Grande , ” Sidney told him . With rising excitement in his voice he asked , “ Can you tell us why they left ? ” Huk nodded . “ This I can do. ” Now the glance of Sidney and George at each other was quick , their eyes lighting . “ I 'll take it down on the typewriter , ” Sidney said . “ Think of it ! Now we 'll know. ” He led Huk to the table set in front of the tent , where he brought out a portable typewriter and opened and set it up . He sat on one chair , and Huk , gingerly holding his aspergill before him as though to protect himself , sat on the other . Good Fox , Moon Water and the other Indians crowded about , curious to see the machine that came alive under Sidney 's fingers as Huk began to relate his story . Soon their interest wandered in favor of other things about the two men with white skin . They wanted to know about the machine with four legs . George opened up the hood of the station wagon and showed them the engine . He sat in the car and started the motor . At the noise the Indians jumped back , alarmed , and reaching for their atlatls . Moon Water approached the rear end of the car . Her pretty nose wrinkled at the fumes coming from it and she choked , drawing back in disgust . “ It is trying to kill me , ” she said . Clearly , she did not approve of an automobile . George cut off its engine . Over Good Fox 's shoulder hung a small clay water jug hung in a plaited yucca net . George asked for a drink from it and when he tasted it and found it fresh it was wondrous to him that its water was hundreds of years old . He brought out a thermos , showing the Indians the modern version of carrying water . They tasted of its contents and exclaimed at its coolness . Good Fox held the thermos , admiring it . “ Would you like to have it ? ” asked George . “ You would give it to me ? ” the handsome young Indian asked . “ It 's yours. ” “ Then I give you mine. ” He gave George his clay water jug and could not know how much more valuable it was than the thermos . George then took them to the portable television set and turned it on . When faces , music , and words appeared the Indians jerked back , then jabbered and gathered closer to watch . A girl singer , clad in a gown that came up to her neck , caused Moon Water to inquire , “ Why does she hide herself ? Is she ashamed ? ” The standards of modesty , George reflected as he glanced at the lovely nude form of the prehistoric Indian girl , change with the ages . Of the people and noises on the TV screen Good Fox wanted to know quite solemnly , “ Are these crazy people ? Is it the way you treat your people who go crazy ? ” George laughed . “ You might say it 's something like that. ” A shout came from Sidney at the card table near the tent where he was taking down Huk 's story . “ George ! He 's just told me why the cliff people left ! And why the desert people will have to leave in time . It 's a reason we never thought of ! It 's because — ” Just then a big multi-engined plane came over , drowning out his words . The Indians stared skyward , now in great alarm . They looked about for a place to run and hide , but there was none . They held their hands over their ears and glanced fearfully at the TV which now spluttered , its picture and sound thrown off by the plane . Awesomely , they waited until the plane went over . “ We fly now in machines with wings , ” George explained . “ To make such a noise in the air , ” Moon Water said , “ is wicked , destroying all peace. ” “ I 'll agree with you there , ” said George . “ You have this , ” Good Fox observed , indicating the TV , which was now back to normal , “ and you send the other through the sky to make it crazier than before. ” He shook his head , not comprehending . George shut off the TV . He took up a camera of the kind that automatically finishes a picture in a minute 's time . Grouping Good Fox , Moon Water and the other warriors , he took their picture , waited , then pulled it out and showed it to them . They cried out , one man shouting in fear , “ It is great magic ! ” George took a number of photographs , including several of Huk as he sat talking with Sidney . No matter what happened he would have this record as Sidney would have that he was taking down on the typewriter . Next he showed them a pair of binoculars , teaching them how to look through them . They exclaimed and Good Fox said , “ With this we could see our enemies before they see us. ” “ You have enemies ? ” George asked . “ The Apache , ” Good Fox said fiercely . George handed him the binoculars . “ It is yours to use against the Apache. ” Solemnly the young chief answered , “ The man with white skin is thanked . The red man gives in return his atlatl and lances. ” He held out his throwing stick and unslung his quiver of lances . George accepted them with thanks ; they would be museum pieces . Finally George showed them a rifle . He looked about for game and after some searching saw a rabbit sitting on a mound in the excavations . As he took aim Good Fox asked , “ You would hunt it with your stick ? ” George nodded . “ This cannot be done from here , ” stated one warrior . George squeezed the trigger . Instantaneously with the explosion of the shell the rabbit jumped high and then came down , limp and dead . The Indians yelled with fright and ran off in all directions . Huk jumped up from the table . Then all stopped and cautiously returned . One went to the rabbit and picked it up , bringing it back . All , including Huk who left the table , stared with fright at it and at the rifle . Moon Water expressed their opinion of it . “ The thunder of the killing stick is evil. ” “ Moon Water speaks the truth , ” said Huk . “ It would make hunting easy , ” said Good Fox , “ but we do not want it even if given to us. ” He drew back from the rifle , and the others edged away from it . George put it down . Sidney held up a sheaf of papers . “ I 've got it all , George , ” he said exultantly in English , “ right here ! I asked Huk if they can stay with us in our time , at least for a while . We can study them more , maybe even take them back to show the world. ” “ What did he say ? ” “ He did n't have a chance to reply when you shot the rifle. ” George put it formally to the Indians , addressing Huk , Good Fox , Moon Water and the rest . “ You have seen something of the modern world . We would like you to stay in it if it is your wish . I do n't know how long you could stay in Huk 's vision , but if you can remain here permanently and not go back to your time and — well , not being alive there any more — we hope you will consider this. ” Huk replied , “ It is possible that we could stay in your time , at least as long as my vision lasts , which might be for as long as I lived. ” He glanced at Good Fox . The young chief in turn looked at Moon Water . Her gaze went to the station wagon , to the TV , then up at the sky where the plane had appeared , at the rifle , the camera , the thermos , and all else of the white man . She seemed to weigh their values and disadvantages , looking dubious and doubtful . Good Fox announced , “ We will hold a council about it . As is our custom , all have words to say about such a thing. ” Abruptly he led his people away , into the excavations and over a slight rise of ground , behind which they disappeared . Sidney murmured , “ I do n't like that so much. ” “ They must do as they want. ” George led the way to the card table and they sat there . On it rested Huk 's aspergill . “ He gave it to me , ” Sidney explained . George placed Good Fox 's netted clay water jug and his atlatl and furred quiver of lances on the table , together with the pictures he had taken of the ancient Indians . They waited . Sidney , glancing at the low hill behind which the Indians had gone , said , “ What they 're doing is choosing between living in modern civilization and remaining dead . What do you think they 'll do ? ” “ I do n't know , ” said George . “ They did n't think so much of us. ” “ But they could n't choose death and complete oblivion ! ” “ We 'll see. ” They waited some more . “ At least , ” said Sidney , indicating the articles on the table , “ we 'll have these for evidence. ” He held up the sheaf of papers containing Huk 's story . “ And this , giving the real reason the cliff dwellers left . I have n't told you what it was , George . It 's so simple that — ” He did n't complete his sentence , for just then Huk , Good Fox , Moon Water , and the other warriors made their choice . It was announced dramatically . The water jug , the aspergill , and the atlatl and quiver of lances disappeared from the table . In their places , suddenly , there were the thermos and the binoculars . Sidney stared stupidly at them . George said quietly , “ They 've gone back. ” “ But they can n't do this ! ” George protested . “ They have. ” Sidney 's hand shook as he picked up the sheaf of papers holding Huk 's story . Indicating it and the photographs , he said , “ Well , they have n't taken these away. ” “ Have n't they ? ” asked George . He picked up some of the pictures . “ Look. ” Sidney looked and saw that the pictures were now blank . His glance went quickly to the typewritten sheets of paper in his hands . He cried out and then shuffled them frantically . They , too , were blank . Sidney jumped up . “ I do n't care ! ” he exclaimed . “ He told me and I 've got it here ! ” He pointed to his head . “ I can remember it , anyway. ” “ Can you ? ” asked George . “ Why , certainly I can , ” Sidney asserted confidently . “ The reason the cliff dwellers left , George , was that they ... ” Sidney stopped . “ What 's the matter , Sid ? ” “ Well , I — it — I guess it just slipped my mind for a second. ” His brow puckered . He looked acutely upset and mystified . “ Huk told me , ” he faltered . “ Just a minute ago I was thinking of it when I started to tell you . Now ... I can n't remember. ” “ That 's gone , too. ” “ I 'll get it ! ” Sidney declared . “ I 've just forgotten it for a minute . I 'll remember ! ” “ No , ” said George , “ you wo n't. ” Sidney looked around . “ There must be something left. ” He thought . “ The atlatl lances they shot at us ! ” He looked at the U-Haul-It . The lances no longer stuck in its side . Nor were those that had fallen to the ground to be seen . Sidney sat down again , heavily . “ We had it all , ” he moaned . “ Everything we 'd been working for . And now ... ” “ Now we 'll have to dig for it again , ” said George . “ Do it the hard way . We 'll start tomorrow when the workmen come. ” Sidney looked up . “ There 's one thing ! ” he cried . “ The dent in the car made by the lance ! It 's still there , George ! However everything else worked , that was forgotten . It 's still there ! ” George glanced at the dent in the side panel of the station wagon . “ It 's still there , ” he agreed . “ But only to tell us this was n't a dream . No one else would believe it was n't caused by a rock. ” George groaned . He stared at the rise of ground behind which the Indians had disappeared . “ Huk , ” he pleaded . “ Good Fox . Moon Water . The others . Come back , come back ... ” No one appeared over the rise of ground as the cool desert night began to close in .