The MAROONER By CHARLES A. STEARNS ILLUSTRATOR SUMMERS Wordsley and Captain DeCastros crossed half a universe — suffered hardship — faced unknown dangers ; and all this for what — a breath of rare perfume ? The creature was more pitiful than fearsome . Steadily they smashed the mensurate battlements , in blackness beyond night and darkness without stars . Yet Mr. Wordsley , the engineer , who was slight , balding and ingenious , was able to watch the firmament from his engine room as it drifted from bow to beam to rocket 's end . This was by virtue of banked rows of photon collectors which he had invented and installed in the nose of the ship . And Mr. Wordsley , at three minutes of the hour of seventeen over four , tuned in a white , new star of eye-blinking magnitude and surpassing brilliance . Discovering new stars was a kind of perpetual game with Mr. Wordsley . Perhaps more than a game . “ I wish I may , I wish I might ... ” Mr. Wordsley said . The fiddly hatch clanged . DeCastros , that gross , terrifying clown of a man , clumped down the ladder from the bridge to defeat the enchantment of the moment . DeCastros held sway . He was captain . He did not want Mr. Wordsley to forget that he was captain . The worst of Captain DeCastros was that he had moods . Just now he was being a sly leprechaun , if one can imagine a double-chinned , three-hundred pound leprechaun . He came over and dug his fingers into Mr. Wordsley 's shoulder . A wracking pain in the trapezius muscle . “ The ertholaters are plugged , ” he said gently . “ The vi-lines are giving out a horrible stink. ” “ I 'll attend to it right away , ” Mr. Wordsley said , wincing a little as he wriggled free . “ Tch , tch , ” DeCastros said , “ can anyone really be so asthenic as you seem , Mr. Wordsley ? ” “ No , sir , ” Mr. Wordsley said , uncertain of his meaning . The captain winked . “ Yet there was that ruffled shirt that I found in the laundromat last week . It was not my shirt . There are only the two of us aboard , Mr. Wordsley. ” “ It was my shirt , ” Mr. Wordsley said , turning crimson . “ I bought it on Vega Four . I — I did n't know — that is , they wear them like that on Vega Four. ” “ Yes , they do , ” DeCastros said . “ Well , well , perhaps you are only a poet , Mr. Wordsley . But should you happen to be a little — well , maggoty , you positively do not have to tell me . No doubt we both have our secrets . Naturally. ” “ I have n't , ” Mr. Wordsley said desperately . “ No ? Then you certainly will not mind that I am recommending an Ab Test for you when we get home. ” Mr. Wordsley 's heart stopped beating for several seconds . He searched Captain DeCastros ’ face for a sign that he might be fooling . He was not . He looked too pleasant . Mr. Wordsley had always managed to pass the Aberrations Test by the skin of his teeth , but he was sure that , like most spiritual geniuses , he was sensitively balanced , and that the power and seniority of a man like DeCastros must influence the Board of Examination . “ You might be decommed . Or even committed to an institution . We would n't want that to happen , would we , Mr. Wordsley ? ” “ Why are you doing this to me ? ” Mr. Wordsley asked strickenly . “ To tell the truth , I do not propose to have any more of my voyages blighted with your moon-calfing , day-dreaming and letting the ertholaters stink up the bridge . Besides — ” Captain DeCastros patted his shoulder almost affectionately . “ — besides , I can n't stand you , Mr. Wordsley. ” Mr. Wordsley nodded . He went over to the screen that was like a window of blessed outer night and sank down on his knees before it . Have the wish I wish tonight . “ Ah , ha ! ” DeCastros exclaimed with sudden ice frozen around the rim of his voice . “ What have we here ? ” “ A new nova , ” Mr. Wordsley answered sullenly . “ It is common knowledge that no engineer can tell a nova from the D. R . blast of an Iphonian freighter . Let me see it. ” He shoved Mr. Wordsley out of the way and examined the screen intently . “ You fool , ” he said at last , “ that 's a planet . It is Avis Solis. ” Now the name of Avis Solis tingled in Mr. Wordsley 's unreliable memory , but it would not advance to be recognized . What planet so bright , and yet so remote from any star by angular measurement ? “ Turn it off , ” DeCastros ordered . Mr. Wordsley turned on him in a sudden fury . “ It 's mine , ” he cried . “ I found it ! Go back to your bridge. ” Then , aghast at what he had said , he clapped his hand over his mouth . “ Dear me , ” said Captain DeCastros silkily . Suddenly he seemed to go quite berserk . He snatched a pile-bar from its rack and swung it at the screen . The outer panel shattered . The screen went dead . Mr. Wordsley grabbed at the bar and got hold of it at the expense of a broken finger . They strained and tugged . The slippery cadmium finally eluded both of them , bounded over the railing into the pit , struck a nomplate far below and was witheringly consumed in a flash of blue flame . Then they were down and rolling over and over , clawing and gouging , until Captain DeCastros inevitably emerged upon top . Mr. Wordsley 's eyes protruded from that unbearable weight , and he wished that there was no such thing as artificial gravity . He struggled vainly . A bit of broken glass crunched beneath his writhing heel . He went limp and began to sob . It was not a very manly thing to do , but Mr. Wordsley was exercising his poetic license . “ Now then , ” said DeCastros , jouncing up and down a bit . “ I trust that you have come to understand who is master of this ship , Mr. Wordsley ? ” His addressee continued to weep silently . After awhile it occurred to Captain DeCastros that what he was doing was expressly forbidden in the Rules of the Way , Section 90-G , and might , in fact , get him into a peck of trouble . So he got up , helped Mr. Wordsley to his feet , and began to brush him off . In a kindly voice he said , “ You must have heard of Avis Solis. ” “ I do n't seem to remember it , ” Mr. Wordsley said . “ It 's a solitaire . One of those planets which depend upon dark , dwarf , satellite suns for heat , you know . It is almost always in eclipse , and I , for one , have always been glad of it. ” “ Why is that ? ” said Mr. Wordsley , not really caring . His chest was giving him considerable pain . “ Because it holds the darkest of memories for me . I lost a brother on Avis Solis . Perhaps you have heard of him . Malmsworth DeCastros . He was quite famous for certain geological discoveries on Titan at one time. ” “ I do n't think so. ” “ You need not be sorry . The wretch was a murderer and a bad sport as well . I need not append that my brother and I were as unlike as night and day — though there is no night and day proper upon Avis Solis , of course . I imagine you would like to hear the story . Then you will undoubtedly understand how it is that I was so upset a moment ago by the sight of Avis Solis , and forgive me. ” Mr. Wordsley nodded . A birdlike , snake-charmed nod . “ Avis Solis is a planet absolutely unique , at least in this galaxy . In addition to being a solitaire , its surface is almost solidly covered to a depth of several meters with light-gathering layers of crystal which give it the brilliant , astral glow that you saw just now . Its satellite suns contribute hardly any light at all . It contains ample oxygen in its atmosphere , but hardly any water , and so is practically barren . An ill-advised mineralogical expedition brought us to Avis Solis. ” “ Us ? ” Mr. Wordsley said . “ There were six of us , five men and a woman . A woman fine and loyal and beautiful , with the body of a consummate goddess and the face of a tolerant angel . I was astrological surveyor and party chief. ” “ I did n't know that you were once a surveyor. ” “ It was seventeen years ago , and none of your business besides. ” “ What happened then ? ” “ Briefly , we were prospecting for ragnite , which was in demand at the time . We had already given up hopes of finding one gram of that mineral , but decided to make a last foray before blasting off . My brother , Malmsworth , stayed at our base camp . Poor Jenny — that was her name — remained behind to care for Malmsworth 's lame ankle. ” Captain DeCastros was lost for several minutes in a bleak and desolate valley of introspection wherein Mr. Wordsley dared not intrude . There was a certain grandeur about his great , dark visage , his falciform nose and meaty jowls as he stood there . Mr. Wordsley began to fidget and clear his throat . DeCastros glared at him . “ They were gone when we returned . Gone , I tell you ! She , to her death . Malmsworth — well , we found him three hours later in the great rift which bisects the massive plateau that is the most outstanding feature of the regular surface of Avis Solis . At the end of this rift there is a natural cave that opens into the sheer wall of the plateau . Within it is a bottomless chasm . It was here that we found certain of Jenny 's garments , but of Jenny , naturally , there was no trace . He had seen to that. ” “ Terrible , ” Mr. Wordsley said . DeCastros smiled reminiscently . “ He fled , but we caught him . He really had a lame ankle , you know. ” The mice of apprehension scampered up and down Mr. Wordsley 's spine . “ You killed him. ” It was a statement of certainty . “ No , indeed . That would have been too easy . We left him there with one portable water-maker and all of that unpalatable but nourishing fungus which thrives upon Avis Solis that he could eat . I have no doubt that he lived until madness reduced his ability to feed himself. ” “ That was drastic , ” Mr. Wordsley felt called upon to say . “ Perhaps — perhaps it occurred to you later on that , in charity to your brother , the er — woman might not have been altogether blameless. ” For a moment he thought that Captain DeCastros was about to strike him again . He did not . Instead he spat at Mr. Wordsley . He had the speed of a cobra . There was not time to get out of the way . Mr. Wordsley employed a handkerchief on his face . “ She was my wife , you know , Mr. Wordsley , ” Captain DeCastros said pleasantly . At nineteen-over-four the contamination buzzers sounded their dread warning . Mr. Wordsley got the alarm first . He had been furtively repairing the viewscreen and thinking dark thoughts the while . There was sick dread for him in the contemplation of the future , for after this last unfortunate blunder DeCastros would be certain to keep his promise and have him examined . This might very well be his last voyage , and Mr. Wordsley had known for quite a long time that he could not live anywhere except out here in the void . Only in space , where the stars were like diamonds . Not in the light of swirling , angry , red suns , not upon the surface of any planet , so drab when you drew too near . Only in the sterile purity of remote space where he could maintain and nourish the essential purity of his day-dreams . But of course one could not explain this to the Board of Examiners ; least of all to Captain DeCastros . Moreover , he was afraid that Avis Solis , which he had been permitted to behold for only a few seconds , would be out of range before he got the scanner to working again . The aspect of this magnificent gem diminishing forever into the limitless night brought a lump to his throat . But then , at last , the screen came alive once more , and there it loomed , more brilliant than ever , now so huge that it filled the screen , and it had not become drab , neither gray-green or brown . No , it was cake frosting , and icicles , and raindrops against the sun , and all of the bright , unattainable Christmas tree ornaments of his childhood . So rapt was he that he scarcely heard the alarm . Yet he responded automatically to the sound that now sent him scrambling into his exposure suit . He fitted one varium-protected oxy-tank to his helmet and tucked another one under his arm for Captain DeCastros . This was superfluous , for DeCastros not only had donned his rig ; he had managed to recall to memory a few dozen vile , degrading swear words gleaned from the sin-pits of Marronn , to hurl at Mr. Wordsley . No one could have helped it , really . Ships under the Drive are insulated from contamination clouds and everything else in normal space . The substance polluting the ventilation system , therefore , must have been trapped within their field since Vega . Now it had entered the ship through some infinitesimal opening in the hull . It was the engineer 's job to find that break . It was not easy , especially with DeCastros breathing down one 's neck . Mr. Wordsley began to perspire heavily , and the moisture ran down and puddled in his boots . An hour passed that was like an age . The prognosis became known and was not reassuring . This was one of the toxic space viruses , dormant at absolute zero , but active under shipboard conditions . A species , in fact , of the dread , oxygen-eating dryorus , which multiplies with explosive rapidity , and kills upon penetration of the human respiratory system . Because of the leak in the hull , the decontaminators could not even hold their own . Mr. Wordsley shuddered to note that ominous , rust-colored cobwebs — countless trillions of dryori — already festooned the stringers of the hull . Another precious hour was taken from them . Mr. Wordsley emerged wearily from the last inspection hole . “ Well ? ” DeCastros snapped . “ Well — well ? ” His face was greenish from the effects of the special , contamination resistant mixture that they were breathing . “ I found the leak , ” Mr. Wordsley said . “ Did you fix it ? ” “ It was one of the irmium alloy plugs in the outer hull beneath the pile . They were originally placed there , I believe , for the installation of a radiation tester . The plug is missing , and I am sorry to say that we have no extras . Anything other than irmium would melt at once , of course. ” “ We have less than eight hours of pure air in the tanks , ” DeCastros said . “ Have you thought of that , you rattle-head ? ” “ Yes , sir , ” Mr. Wordsley said . “ And if I might be allowed to speculate , Captain , I would say that we are finished unless we can make a planetfall . Only then would I be able to remove the lower port tube , weld the cavity , seal the ship and fumigate. ” “ We 're four weeks from the nearest star , Fomalhaut ; you know that as well as I do. ” “ I was thinking , ” said Mr. Wordsley , with a sudden , suffused glow in his cheeks , “ of Avis Solis. ” Mr. Wordsley shut his eyes as they were going down , because he wanted to open them and surprise himself , at the moment of landing . But the cold , white glare was more intense than he had expected , and he had to shut them again and turn on the polarizer . He buckled on his tools and the carbo-torch , and went down the ladder . He dropped at once to his knees , not because of the gravity , which was not bad , but because of a compulsion to get his face as near to the surface of Avis Solis as possible . It was even lovelier than when seen from space . He trod upon a sea of diamonds . A million tiny winkings and scintillations emanated from each crystal . A million crystals lay beneath the sole of his boot . He would rather not have stepped on them , but it could not be helped . They were everywhere . Mr. Wordsley gloated . DeCastros dropped like a huge slug from the ladder behind him . “ What are you doing ? ” he said . “ Picnicking ? ” “ I was tying my shoe , ” Mr. Wordsley said , and got to work with an alacrity that was wholly false . The dark sun-satellites rose by twos and threes over the horizon , felt rather than clearly seen . There was a dry wind that blew from the glittering wasteland and whistled around the base of the rockets as Mr. Wordsley labored on and on . Captain DeCastros had withdrawn to a level outcropping of igneous rock and sat staring at the nothing where the greenish-black sky met the pale gray horizon . The tube was loosened on its shackles and presently fell , with a tinkling sound , upon the surface of Avis Solis . The opening was sealed and welded . Mr. Wordsley was practically finished , but he did not hurry . Instead , he went around to the opposite side of the ship on a pretense of inspection , and sat down where DeCastros could not see him . For awhile he stared at the many-faceted depths of the crystals ; then he leaned over and touched them with his lips . They were smooth and exciting . They cut his lip . But he had the distinct feeling that there was something wrong with this idyll . It seemed to him that he was being spied upon . He sneaked a furtive glance behind him . DeCastros was still sitting where he had been , with his back to him . Mr. Wordsley slowly lifted his gaze to the plateau of shimmering glass that was before him . At its rim , a hundred feet above him , a silent figure stood gazing down upon him . A man even six feet tall might easily have frightened Mr. Wordsley into a nervous breakdown by staring at him with that gaunt , hollow-eyed stare , but this creature , though manlike , was fully fifty feet tall , incredibly elongated , and stark naked . Its hair was long and matted ; its cheeks sunken , its lips pulled back in an expression which might have been anything from a smile to a cannibalistic snarl . Mr. Wordsley cried out . Captain DeCastros heard and came running across the intervening distance with swiftness incredible in one of his bulk at this gravity . His blizzer was out . It was one of the very latest models of blizzers . Very destructive . Mr. Wordsley had always been afraid to touch it . He fired , and part of the plateau beneath the titan 's feet fell away in a sparkling shower . The creature vanished . DeCastros was red-faced and wheezing . “ That was Malmsworth , ” he said . “ Now how the devil do you suppose he managed to stick it out all these years ! ” “ If that was Malmsworth , ” Mr. Wordsley said , “ he must be a very tall man. ” “ That was merely dimensional mirage . Come along . We 'll have to hurry if we catch him. ” “ Why do we want to catch him ? ” Mr. Wordsley said . Captain DeCastros made a sound of sober surprise . Even of pious wonder . “ Malmsworth is my only brother , ” he said . Mr. Wordsley wanted to say , “ Yes , but you shot at him. ” He did not , because there was no time . He had to hurry to catch up with DeCastros , who was even now scrambling up the steep slope . From the rim they could see Malmsworth out there on the flat . He was making good time , but Captain DeCastros proceeded to demonstrate that he was no mean hiker , himself . Mr. Wordsley 's side began to hurt , and his breath came with difficulty . He might have died , if he had not feared to incur DeCastros ’ anger . At times the naked man was a broad , flat monster upon that shimmering tableland . Again he seemed almost invisible ; then gigantic and tenuous . Presently he disappeared altogether . “ Oho ! ” DeCastros said , “ If I am not mistaken , old Malmsworth has holed up in that very same rift where we caught him at his dirty business seventeen years ago . He 's as mad as a Martian ; you can lay to that . He 'd have to be. ” The rift , when they arrived at its upper reaches , was cool and shadowy . In its depths nothing sparkled . It was ordinary limestone . The walls were covered with a dull yellow moss , except for great , raw wounds where it had been torn off . “ That 's Malmsworth 's work , ” Captain DeCastros said . “ In seventeen years , Mr. Wordsley , one will consume a lot of moss , I daresay . Shall we descend ? ” The rift had reached its depth quite gradually , so that Mr. Wordsley scarcely realized that they were going down until the surface glare was suddenly gone , and the green-walled gloom surrounded them . It might have been a pleasant place , but Mr. Wordsley did not like it . Captain DeCastros was taking his time now , resting frequently . There was not the slightest chance of Malmsworth 's getting away , for at the other end of the rift lay the cave and the abyss containing , at least , one ghost of Malmsworth 's terrible past . But though it might seem drab after the plateau and the plain , the rift had its points of interest . Along the walls , everywhere , as high as a tall man might reach , the moss had been torn or scraped from the surface . There was no second growth . Every quarter of a mile or so they came upon the former campsites of the castaway , each marked by a flat-topped cairn of small stones three or four feet in height . DeCastros was at a loss to explain this . Mr. Wordsley supposed that it was one of the marks of a diseased mind . Not that he actually understood the workings of a diseased mind . Privately , he suspected that DeCastros was a little mad . Certainly he was subject to violent , unreasonable tempers which could not be explained . The unfortunate strain might have cropped up more strongly in his brother . Might not these walls have rung with lunatic screams after months and years of hollow-eyed watching for the ship that never came ? It might have been different , of course , had Malmsworth been able to appreciate the aesthetic values of life , as Mr. Wordsley did . But doubtless these lovely miles and miles of crystalline oceans had been but a desert to the castaway . Eventually the rift widened a little , and they came to a dead end , beyond which lay the cave . It must have been formed ages ago by trickling waters before Avis Solis lost its clouds and rivers . Here they found the last of the cairns , and the answer to their construction . The water-maker which the expedition had left with Malmsworth seventeen years ago rested upon this neat platform , and below it a delicate basin , eighteen inches or so in depth , had been constructed of stones and chinked with moss . Fit monument for the god , machine . It was filled with water , and quite obviously a bathtub . Captain DeCastros sneered . This proved beyond doubt that Malmsworth was mad , for in the old days he had been the very last to care about his bath . In fact , DeCastros said , Malmsworth occasionally stank . This was probably not true , but it seemed curious , nonetheless . Captain DeCastros set to work kicking the tub to pieces . He kicked so hard that one stone whistled past the head of Mr. Wordsley , who ducked handily . Soon the basin lay in rubble , and the water-maker , its supports collapsed , listed heavily to the right . “ He must be in the cave , ” Captain DeCastros said . He cupped his hands to his mouth . “ Come out , Malmsworth , we know you 're in there ! ” But there was no answer , and Malmsworth did not come out , so Captain DeCastros , blizzer in hand , went in , with Mr. Wordsley following at a cautious interval . Presently they stood upon the edge of something black and yawning , but there was still no sign of the exile , who seemed , like Elijah , to have been called directly to his Maker without residue . Beyond the gulf , however , Mr. Wordsley had glimpsed a ragged aperture filled with the purest light . It seemed inconceivable to him — attracted as he had always been by radiance — that this should be inaccessible . Accordingly , he lay down upon his belly and stretched his hand as far down as he could reach . His fingers brushed a level surface which appeared to extend outwards for two or three feet . Gingerly he lowered himself to this ledge and began to feel his way along the wall . Nor was he greatly surprised ( for hardly anything surprised Mr. Wordsley any more ) that it neatly circumnavigated the pit and deposited him safely upon the other side , where he quickly groped toward the mouth of the cavern and stood gazing out upon a scene that was breathtaking . From this vantage the easily accessible slope led to the foot of the plateau . Beyond lay the grandeur of Avis Solis . Captain DeCastros was soon beside him . “ A very clever trick , that ledge , ” he said . “ Malmsworth thinks to elude us , but he never shall , eh , Mr. Wordsley ? ” There were tears of frustration in his eyes . It embarrassed Mr. Wordsley , who could only point to the pall of gleaming dust where their ship had lain , and to the silver needle which glinted for a moment in the sky and was gone . “ Malmsworth would not do that to me , ” Captain DeCastros said . But he had . “ We may be here quite a long while , ” Mr. Wordsley said , and could not contrive to sound downhearted about it . But Captain DeCastros had already turned away and was feeling his way back along the ledge . Mr. Wordsley waited just a moment longer ; then he took from his pocket a heavy object and dropped it upon the slope and it rolled over and over , down and down , until its metallic sheen was lost in that superior glare . It was a spare irmium alloy plug . He made his way back to the water-maker . They would have to take good care of it from now on . He was not concerned with the basin . However , in the soft , damp sand beside the basin , plainly imprinted there , as if someone 's raiding party had interrupted someone 's bathing party , there remained a single , small and dainty footprint . One could almost imagine that a faint breath of perfume still lingered upon the sheltered air of the rift , but , of course , only things which glittered interested Mr. Wordsley . THE END