[ Illustration : Illustrated by FRIES ] Tree , Spare That Woodman By DAVE DRYFOOS The single thing to fear was fear — ghastly , walking fear ! Stiff with shock , Naomi Heckscher stood just inside the door to Cappy 's one-room cabin , where she 'd happened to be when her husband discovered the old man 's body . Her nearest neighbor — old Cappy — dead . After all his wire-pulling to get into the First Group , and his slaving to make a farm on this alien planet , dead in bed ! Naomi 's mind circled frantically , contrasting her happy anticipations with this shocking actuality . She 'd come to call on a friend , she reminded herself , a beloved friend — round , white-haired , rosy-cheeked ; lonely because he 'd recently become a widower . To her little boy , Cappy was a combination Grandpa and Santa Claus ; to herself , a sort of newly met Old Beau . Her mouth had been set for a sip of his home brew , her eyes had pictured the delight he 'd take in and give to her little boy . She 'd walked over with son and husband , expecting nothing more shocking than an ostentatiously stolen kiss . She 'd found a corpse . And to have let Cappy die alone , in this strange world ... She and Ted could at least have been with him , if they 'd known . But they 'd been laughing and singing in their own cabin only a mile away , celebrating Richard 's fifth birthday . She 'd been annoyed when Cappy failed to show up with the present he 'd promised Richard . Annoyed — while the old man pulled a blanket over his head , turned his round face to the wall , and died . Watching compassionately , Naomi was suddenly struck by the matter-of-fact way Ted examined the body . Ted was n't surprised . “ Why did you tell Richard to stay outside , just now ? ” she demanded . “ How did you know what we 'd find here ? And why did n't you tell me , so I could keep Richard at home ? ” She saw Ted start , scalded by the splash of her self-directed anger , saw him try to convert his wince into a shrug . “ You insisted on coming , ” he reminded her gently . “ I could n't have kept you home without — without saying too much , worrying you — with the Earth-ship still a year away . Besides , I did n't know for sure , till we saw the tree-things around the cabin. ” The tree-things . The trees-that-were-not . Gnarled blue trunks , half-hidden by yellow leaf-needles stretching twenty feet into the sky . Something like the hoary mountain hemlocks she and Ted had been forever photographing on their Sierra honeymoon , seven life-long years ago . Three of those tree-things had swayed over Cappy 's spring for a far longer time than Man had occupied this dreadful planet . Until just now ... The three of them had topped the rise that hid Cappy 's farm from their own . Richard was running ahead like a happily inquisitive puppy . Suddenly he 'd stopped , pointing with a finger she distinctly recalled as needing thorough soapy scrubbing . “ Look , Mommie ! ” he 'd said . “ Cappy 's trees have moved . They 're around the cabin , now. ” He 'd been interested , not surprised . In the past year , Mazda had become Richard 's home ; only Earth could surprise him . But , Ted , come to think of it , had seemed withdrawn , his face a careful blank . And she ? “ Very pretty , ” she 'd said , and stuffed the tag-end of fear back into the jammed , untidy mental pigeon-hole she used for all unpleasant thoughts . “ Do n't run too far ahead , dear. ” But now she had to know what Ted knew . “ Tell me ! ” she said . “ These tree-things — ” “ There 've been other deaths ! How many ? ” “ Sixteen . But I did n't want to tell you . Orders were to leave women and children home when we had that last Meeting , remember. ” “ What did they say at the Meeting ? Out with it , Ted ! ” “ That — that the tree-things think ! ” “ But that 's ridiculous ! ” “ Well , unfortunately , no . Look , I 'm not trying to tell you that terrestrial trees think , too , nor even that they have a nervous system . They do n't . But — well , on Earth , if you 've ever touched a lighted match to the leaf of a sensitive plant like the mimosa , say — and I have — you 've been struck by the speed with which other leaves close up and droop . I mean , sure , we know that the leaves droop because certain cells exude water and nearby leaves feel the heat of the match . But the others do n't , yet they droop , too . Nobody knows how it works ... ” “ But that 's just defensive ! ” “ Sure . But that 's just on Earth ! ” “ All right , dear . I wo n't argue any more . But I still do n't understand . Go on about the Meeting. ” “ Well , they said these tree-things both create and respond to the patterned electrical impulses of the mind . It 's something like the way a doctor creates fantasies by applying a mild electric current to the right places on a patient 's brain . In the year we 've been here , the trees — or some of them — have learned to read from and transmit to our minds . The range , they say , is around fifty feet . But you have to be receptive — ” “ Receptive ? ” “ Fearful . That 's the condition . So I did n't want to tell you because you must not let yourself become afraid , Naomi . We 're clearing trees from the land , in certain areas . And it 's their planet , after all . Fear is their weapon and fear can kill ! ” “ You still — all you men — should have let us women know ! What do you think we are ? Besides , I do n't really believe you . How can fear kill ? ” “ Have n't you ever heard of a savage who gets in bad with his witch-doctor and is killed by magic ? The savage is convinced , having seen or heard of other cases , that he can be killed . The witch-doctor sees to it he 's told he will be killed . And sometimes the savage actually dies — ” “ From poison , I 've always thought. ” “ The poison of fear . The physical changes that accompany fear , magnified beyond belief by belief itself. ” “ But how in the world could all this have affected Cappy ? He was n't a savage . And he was elderly , Ted . A bad heart , maybe . A stroke . Anything. ” “ He passed his pre-flight physical only a year ago . And — well , he lived all alone . He was careful not to let you see it , but I know he worried about these three trees on his place . And I know he got back from the Meeting in a worried state of mind . Then , obviously , the trees moved — grouped themselves around his cabin within easy range . But do n't be afraid of them , Naomi . So long as you 're not , they can n't hurt you . They 're not bothering us now. ” “ No . But where 's Richard ? ” Naomi 's eyes swept past Ted , encompassing the cabin . No Richard ! He 'd been left outside ... Glass tinkled and crashed as she flung back the cabin door . “ Richard ! Richard ! ” Her child was not in sight . Nor within earshot , it seemed . “ Richard Heckscher ! Where are you ? ” Sanity returned with the conventional primness . And it brought her answer . “ Here I am , Mommie ! Look-at ! ” He was in a tree ! He was fifteen feet off the ground , high in the branches of a tree-thing , swaying — For an instant , dread flowed through Naomi as if in her bloodstream and something was cutting off her breath . Then , as the hands over mouth and throat withdrew , she saw they were Ted 's . She let him drag her into the cabin and close the broken door . “ Better not scare Richard , ” he said quietly , shoving her gently into a chair . “ He might fall. ” Dumbly she caught her breath , waiting for the bawling out she 'd earned . But Ted said , “ Richard keeps us safe . So long as we fear for him , and not ourselves — ” That was easy to do . Outside , she heard a piping call : “ Look at me now , Mommie ! ” “ Showing off ! ” she gasped . In a flashing vision , Richard was half boy , half vulture , flapping to the ground with a broken wing . “ Here , ” said Ted , picking up a notebook that had been on the table . “ Here 's Cappy 's present . A homemade picture book . Bait. ” “ Let me use it ! ” she said . “ Richard may have seen I was scared just now. ” Outside again , under the tree , she called , “ Here 's Cappy 's present , Richard . He 's gone away and left it for you. ” Would he notice how her voice had gone up half an octave , become flat and shrill ? “ I 'm coming down , ” Richard said . “ Let me down , tree. ” He seemed to be struggling . The branches were cagelike . He was caught ! Naomi 's struggle was with her voice . “ How did you ever get up there ? ” she called . “ The tree let me up , Mommie , ” Richard explained solemnly , “ but he wo n't let me down ! ” He whimpered a little . He must not become frightened ! “ You tell that tree you 've got to come right down this instant ! ” she ordered . She leaned against the cabin for support . Ted came out and slipped his arm around her . “ Break off a few leaves , Richard , ” he suggested . “ That 'll show your tree who 's boss ! ” Standing close against her husband , Naomi tried to stop shaking . But she lacked firm support , for Ted shook , too . His advice to Richard was sound , though . What had been a trap became , through grudging movement of the branches , a ladder . Richard climbed down , scolding at the tree like an angry squirrel . Naomi thought she 'd succeeded in shutting her mind . But when her little boy slid down the final bit of trunk and came for his present , Naomi broke . Like a startled animal , she thrust the book into his hands , picked him up and ran . Her mind was a jelly , red and quaking . She stopped momentarily after running fifty yards . “ Burn the trees ! ” she screamed over her shoulder . “ Burn the cabin ! Burn it all ! ” She ran on , Ted 's answering shouts beyond her comprehension . Fatigue halted her . At the top of the rise between Cappy 's farm and their own , pain and dizziness began flowing over her in waves . She set Richard down on the mauve soil and collapsed beside him . When she sat up , Richard squatted just out of reach , watching curiously . She made an effort at casualness : “ Let 's see what Daddy 's doing back there. ” “ He 's doing just what you said to , Mommie ! ” Richard answered indignantly . Her men were standing together , Naomi realized . She laughed . After a moment , Richard joined her . Then he looked for his book , found it a few paces away , and brought it to her . “ Read to me , Mommie. ” “ At home , ” she said . Activity at Cappy 's interested her now . Wisps of smoke were licking around the trees . A tongue of flame lapped at one while she watched . Branches writhed . The trees were too slow-moving to escape ... But where was Ted ? What had she exposed him to , with her hysterical orders ? She held her breath till he moved within sight , standing quietly by a pile of salvaged tools . Behind him the cabin began to smoke . Ted was n't afraid , then . He understood what he faced . And Richard was n't afraid , either , because he did n't understand . But she ? Surreptitiously Naomi pinched her hip till it felt black and blue . That was for being such a fool . She must not be afraid ! “ Daddy seems to be staying there , ” she said . “ Let 's wait for him at home , Richard. ” “ Are you going to make Daddy burn our tree ? ” She jumped as if stung . Then , consciously womanlike , she sought relief in talk . “ What do you think we should do , dear ? ” “ Oh , I like the tree , Mommie . It 's cool under there . And the tree plays with me. ” “ How , Richard ? ” “ If I 'm pilot , he 's navigator . Or ship , maybe . But he 's so dumb , Mommie ! I always have to tell him everything . Does n't know what a fairy is , or Goldilocks , or anything ! ” He clutched his book affectionately , rubbing his face on it . “ Hurry up , Mommie . It 'll be bedtime before you ever read to me ! ” She touched his head briefly . “ You can look at the book while I fix your supper. ” But to explain Cappy 's pictures — crudely crayoned cartoons , really — she had to fill in the story they illustrated . She told it while Richard ate : how the intrepid Spaceman gallantly used his ray gun against the villainous Martians to aid the green-haired Princess . Richard spooned up the thrills with his mush , gazing fascinated at Cappy 's colorful and fantastic pictures , propped before him on the table . Had Ted been home , the scene might almost have been blissful . It might have been ... if their own tree had n't reminded her of Cappy 's . Still , she 'd almost managed to stuff her fear back into that mental pigeon-hole before their own tree . It was unbelievable , but she 'd been glancing out the window every few minutes , so she saw it start . Their own tree began to walk . Down the hill it came — right there !— framed in the window behind Richard 's head , moving slowly but inexorably on a root system that writhed along the surface . Like some ancient sculpture of Serpents Supporting the Tree of Life . Except that it brought death ... “ Are you sick , Mommie ? ” No , not sick . Just something the matter with her throat , preventing a quick answer , leaving no way to keep Richard from turning to look out the window . “ I think our tree is coming to play with me , Mommie. ” No , no ! Not Richard ! “ Remember how you used to say that about Cappy ? When he was really coming to see your daddy ? ” “ But Daddy is n't home ! ” “ He 'll get here , dear . Now eat your supper. ” A lot to ask of an excited little boy . And the tree was his friend , it seemed . Cappy 's tree had even followed the child 's orders . Richard might intercede — No ! Expose him to such danger ? How could she think of it ? “ Had enough to eat , dear ? Wash your hands and face at the pump , and you can stay out and play till Daddy gets home . I — I want —— I may have to see your friend , the tree , by myself ... ” “ But you have n't finished my story ! ” “ I will when Daddy gets home . And if I 'm not here , you tell Daddy to do it. ” “ Where are you going , Mommie ? ” “ I might see Cappy , dear . Now go and wash , please ! ” “ Sure , Mommie . Do n't cry. ” Accept his kiss , even if it is from a mouth rimmed with supper . And do n't rub it off till he 's gone out , you damned fool . You frightened fool . You shaking , sweating , terror-stricken fool . Who 's he going to kiss when you 're not here ? The tree has stopped . Our little tree is having its supper . How nice . Sucking sustenance direct from soil with aid of sun and air in true plant fashion — but exhausting our mineral resources . ( How wise of Ted to make you go to those lectures ! You would n't want to die in ignorance , would you ?) The lecture — come on , let 's go back to the lecture ! Let 's free our soil from every tree or we 'll not hold the joint in fee . No , not joint . A vulgarism , teacher would say . Methinks the times are out of joint . Aroint thee , tree ! Now a pinch . Pinch yourself hard in the same old place so it 'll hurt real bad . Then straighten your face and go stick your head out the window . Your son is talking — your son , your sun . Can your son be eclipsed by a tree ? A matter of special spatial relationships , and the space is shrinking , friend . The tree is only a few hundred feet from the house . It has finished its little supper and is now running around . Like Richard . With Richard ! Congenial , what ? Smile , stupid . Your son speaks . Answer him . “ What , dear ? ” “ I see Daddy ! He just came over the hill . He 's running ! Can I go meet him , Mommie ? ” “ No , dear . It 's too far. ” Too far . Far too far . “ Did you say something to me , Richard ? ” “ No . I was talking to the tree . I 'm the Spaceman and he 's the Martian . But he does n't want to be the Martian ! ” Richard plays . Let us play . Let us play . You 're close enough to get into the game , surely . A hundred and fifty feet , maybe . Effective range , fifty feet . Rate of motion ? Projected time-interval ? Depends on which system you observe it from . Richard has a system . “ He does n't want to play , Mommie . He wants to see you ! ” “ You tell that tree your Mommie never sees strangers when Daddy is n't home ! ” “ I 'll make him wait ! ” Stoutly your pot-bellied little protector prevents his protective mother from going to pot . “ If he wo n't play , I 'll use my ray gun on him ! ” Obviously , the tree wo n't play . Watch your son lift empty hands , arm himself with a weapon yet to be invented , and open fire on the advancing foe . “ Aa-aa-aa ! ” So that 's how a ray gun sounds ! “ You 're dead , tree ! You 're dead ! Now you can n't play with me any more . You 're dead ! ” Seeing it happen , then , watching the tree accept the little boy 's fantasy as fact , Naomi wondered why she 'd never thought of that herself . So the tree was a treacherous medicine-man , was it ? A true-believing witch-doctor ? And who could be more susceptible to the poisoning of fear than a witch-doctor who has made fear work — and believes it 's being used against him ? It was all over . She and the tree bit the dust together . But the tree was dead , and Naomi merely fainting , and Ted would soon be home ... — DAVE DRYFOOS